


Digitized by Google

WORKS
OF THE HONOURABLE
ROBERT BOYLE.
In SIX VOLUMES.
To vrhich is prefixed
The LIFE of the AUTHOR*
VOLUME THE FIRST*
A NEW EDITION*
LONDON:
Printed for j. and F. Rwnoton, L. Davis, W. Johnston, S. Crowder, T. Payne,
G. Kbarsley, J. Robson, B. White, T. Becket and P. A. De Hondt,
T. Davies, T. Cam ell, Robinson and Roberts, Richardson
and Richardson, J. Knox, W. Woodfall, J. Johnson*
and T. Evans. MDCCLXXU.
Digitized by Google
…
SOME
MOTIVES and INCENTIVES
T O T H E
LOVE of GOD,
Pathetically difcourfed of, in a Letter to a Friend:
To the COUNTESS of WARWICK.
My Dear Sister,
I EXPECT you fhould fomewhat wonder, that after having for above eleven
years been careful to keep this following letter from the public view, and that too
notwithftanding the felicitation (not to fay importunity) of divers illuftrious perfons,
and even your commands to rcleale it from its confinement •, I mould now at length
give way to its patting abroad into the world, and its making you a public and folemn
addrefs. Wherefore judging myfelf obliged to give you an account of a paper, for
which you have been long pleafed fo highly and fo obligingly to concern yourfelf, I
mult, to remove your wonder, inform you, that I am reduced to this publication in
my own defence. For, whilft I was far from dreaming of permitting this epiftle to
pafs out of my clofet, it happened, that a broken copy of it did (by I know not
what misfortune for me) fall into the hands of a neceflkous perfon, who would needs
perluade himfelf, that by printing it, he might relieve fome of his prefent wants ;
and thereupon proffered to fell the copy for a lum of money. But my good fortune
leading him to a ftationer, to whom my name was not unknown, he very civilly fent
me forthwith notice of the proportion that was made him, and after came himfelf
to acquaint me, that the copy, about which he had been treated with, being but one
of two or three, that were then abroad, fome or other of them would, c[ucfUonleis,
foon find the way to the prefs. This unwelcome accident did little lefs trouble than
furprizc me ; for, befides that it impofed on me the neceffity of a publication I had
fo long declined ; and beiides that I knew, that * compofurcs of a very differing nature
being expected from me, the appearing of this, inftead of them, would make
this unwelcome to many, though it had fewer imperfections than it has : beiides
thefc things (I fay) my fight was then, and is flill, fo impaired by a diftemper in my
eyes •, and the hours I could diipofe of were fo pre-ingaged to philofophical themes
• Some Trcatifes relating to Experimental Philofophy.
li 2 that
244 7%e Epiflle Dedicatory.
that I could not promife myfclf fo much as to read it it over before its going to the
printer. But confidcring after all this, that the copy 1 had by me was like to prove
more full, and lefs faulty, than any of thofe, that fome endeavoured to obtrude upon
the world, I thought it lefs inconvenient to venture mine own abroad, than to run
the hazard of a furreptitious edition of a difcouric, that could lb ill bear the appearing
with any other blcmilhes, than thofe it brought with it into the world from my
pen. And therefore having put it into the hands of perfons, whofe eminent abilities
the more knowing part of the nation has long and jultly admired, and begged their
impartial opinion and caftigations of it (giving them entire liberty to alter or expunge
whatever they difltkedj) and finding (by haftify turning over the leaves) that their
caftigations were only enough to let me fee, that they had needfully read it over and
were accompanied with encouragements, which care was taken to keep me from looking
upon as meer compliments : I let it go to the prefs, without fo much as having
once j>erufed it, or heard it read over, fince tlie ftationcr firft gave me the advertifement
I told you of. Which I made the lefs fcruple to do, becaufc a critic, whofe
judgment and piety I much reverence, ferioufly endeavoured to perfuade me, that I
ought not in confcicnce to decline publifhing what he was plcafed to think proper to
kindle or cherilh the flames of divine love in the breads of the readers. And my
hafte itfelf did afterwards promife me thefe advantages, that notwithstanding my
book's not coming forth fooner, I Ihould not lofe the excufe of youth I had when it
was written ; nay, and that the faulty paflages, which may be met with in it, will
perhaps be charged upon thofe, that fuflered them to pafs uncorrected, when they had
fo absolute a power to expunge or reform them. Thefe, and the like motives, having
induced me to confent to the publication of the following letter, I needed not deliberate
long, to whom I Ihould addrefs it. For, fince that accomplifhed JJudatnor^
whom it fo much concerned, has left the world, there is no perfon in it, to whom this
addrcfc is any thing near fo due, as unto you, dear fifter. It was at that delicious
Leezet where you arc now the miftrefs, that this letter was written ; and it wai of you
that I borrowed thofe hours 1 fpent in writing it. It was to you, that I (hewed
it almoft fheet by meet, before I reforved to fend it away. It is you, that can bell
excufe the imperfections of it, as knowing not only the more obvious, but the more
private avocations and other difadvantages, among which it was penned. It is you,
that have ever fince follicited mc to divulge it, and have given me the greateft encouragements
to do fo, not only by thofe follicitations, which implied your own favourable
opinion of it. but by procuring me (by concealing or difguifing my name) the
unfufpeftcd opinions of divers competent judges. In a word, this addrefs belongs
upon fo many fcores to you, that I could not make it any where elie, without manifeftly
wronging you. I know, dear Sifter, that it is not ufual to dedicate books to fo
near a relation ; and that it is ufual, in dedicatory epiftles, both to depreciate what
one has written, and to extol the perfon that one writes to, efpecially if it be one of
your fex and quality. But you know too, that I never fwore allegiance to cuftom, and
therefore will not, I fuppofe, wonder to fee me as little folicitous to conform to it on
this occafion as on others. In an age, when fo few perfons have merit enough to keep
that from being flattery, which ftiould be but praifc, I am not at all ambitious of
carting myfclf upon the unhappy necefllty, of either flattering, or appearing rude
;
when by better cluifing the objects of my addreflcs, I can, as occafion requires, give
priifes without untruth, or forbear them without incivility. Nor dare I prefume,.
that a lye ceafes to be a fault, by being put into a dedicatory epiftle ; as antiently the
hurtful beafts forgot their pernicious nature,, when brought into the ark. Not to
mention
.
7
Digitized by Google
The Epijile Dedicatory. 245
mention, that book* of devotion have generally the ftrange and unhappy fate of
being lefs welcome to them, that moft, than to them, that lefs need them. As for
the difcourfe I prefent you, though my opinion of it may be gueffed at, by the privacy,
to which I have fo long confined it ; yet becaufe, as in phyfic, to have a good
opinion of the medicine, and the do&or, fo in books of devotion (which are a kind
of phyfic for the mind) to have one of the compoiure, or of the writer, both inclines
us to look after the prescriptions, and advantages their operations : for this
. reafon 1 fhall lay nothing to dil'paragc a difcourfe, which is of a nature to aim more
at the being practifed by the readers, than the being pardoned ; and fhall not at all
repine to fee it find, from the public, as favourable a reception, as it has hitherto met
with in clofets. And now, dear Siller, though I know you will not, yet 1 doubt,
my other readers will expect, that this letter fhould, according to the mode of epiftles
dedicatory, be concluded with commendations of you, and compliments to you ; it
being almoft as much out of fafhion in fuch addreffes to omit giving praifes, as it is
to believe the praifes given on fuch occafion. But, though I can praife you without
either difbelieving myfelf, or fearing to be difbelieved by any that knows you ; yer,.
befides that our relation, and our friendfhip, would make fuch a way of writing mifbecoming
me on all occafions j I know your piety and your modefly would peculiarly
difallow it upon this j where the fubjeft 1 am to entertain you with is of inch a nature,
as would make a flaunting addrefs but a very unfuitable introduction to it-
The nature of my theme, as well as the ftrictnefs of your virtue, and our friendfhip,
forbidding me here to celebrate you, otherwife than by letting the world fee, that I
dare, even in a dedicatory addrefs, without fear of difpleafing you, forbear to celebrate
you. And if it be demanded, why then I refrain not likewife from writing to
you a dedication ? I fhall anfwer, that I am unwilling to lofe this opportunity of
making a public acknowledgment, that as I have the honour to be your brother, and
your friend, fo I have the juftice to think it very much my happinels to be fo : efpecially,
fincc you are pleafed to affure me, that my relation to you has rather been
the occafion than the ground of a frieodfllip, that does, whilft it enjoins me to profefs
myfelf without compliment, oblige me to be, with all the fuicerity that is
poffible,
My dear Sifter,
Your moft affectionate Brother, and
Moft faithful, humble Servant,
ROBERT BOYLE.
Digitized by Google
246
rnp O prevent thofe fcruples, which elfe might arife in the perufal of the enfuing
1 difcourfe, the reader of it is requefted to take notice.
I. That though ignorance hath been of late fo much in falhion with too many
of our young nobility, that fome pafiages of the enfuing papers may feem unfit to
have been written to a young gentlemen ; yet the perfon they were addreflcd to, being
both a traveller, a linguift, and a fcholar, it was not improper to difcourfe with him
at the rate of fuppofing him fo qualified.
II. That the enfuing letter was not written fingle, being but the laft of divers,
wherein love in general was confeflcd, juftified, and celebrated •, wherein the received
way of making love was explicated, defended, and expofed •, wherein conftancy and
inconftancy in love were argued for and againft •, wherein Platonic love was explicated,
celebrated, and wherein the cure of love was propofed and profecuted;
wherein (to dilpatch) the controverted points concerning love were difcourfed of, in
a way fuitcd to the feveral themes, and to the humours and principles of the fuppofed
writers. But all the former papers (written in compliment to a fair lady) though
very free from the guilt of eidier licentioufnefs or profancnefs, have been by the author
judged too little fcrious, either to appear alone, or to accompany the enfuing
difcourfe, wherein he has exprcflcd his own opinions, as in the former he but deduced
thofe of imaginary perfons.
III. That the following paper was to have been attended by another, wherein the
properties and duties of fcraphic love were to have been explicated and infilled on
vAmw but tnc author, before he had written that other, accidentally meeting with a French
dm*, <fc book, wherein though what he had already difcourfed of were not handled, he found,
Moulin. tnat much of what he had defigncd to fct down was anticipated, and the moft pertinent
confutations his intended themes fuggefted, were fkilfully difplaycd already,
he feared it might be injurious to his reader, and himfelf, if he Ihould either turn a
tranferiber of others nations, or decline the belt thoughts belonging to his theme, that
the lefs good ones might pals without fuipicion for his own.
IV. That the enfuing trifle having been written in hafte, and by fnatches, amongft
diffracting avocations, and far from literary accommodations, is freely fubmittcd to
the cenfurc c f learned and impartial perufers, efpccially divines •, who are by the
author requefted to believe its miftaktn paflages, and unwary expreflions (if it contain
any fuch) to have been altogether unintentional, and fuch as they fhall never find
it to be more than one labour to make him dilcern and retract v he being refolved,
by God's alfiftancc, to continue ftill obfequious enough to all clearer difcovcries of
truth, to be able to fay, Errare pojjum, b<creiicus ejj'e nolo. And as he is on his part
forefigned, and lb willing to be rectified, fo he expects this equity from thofe, to
whole judgment* he fubmtM, that, confidering he intended not to write a folemn and
regular trcatife, but a private and familiar cpiitlc, they will pals by fuch unaccurateneffes,
as are wont to be incident to compofers of this later nature. He prefurned he
Bight fonietimcs make bold with the vulgar laws of tenfes, treating of an eternity,
Digitized by Google
I
Seraphic Love. a
that admits them not. He hoped, that the freedom taken in fome of his expreflions
concerning love, and the wonted objects of it, would be excufed, by its being exacted
by the defign he had upon Lindamor, though he had not (which yet he has), otherwife
accounted for it*. He intends not to adopt thofe (too often erroneous) traditions
of the vulgar, whence he fomctimes draws comparifons, that he may not deny
himfelf the liberty taken by the generality of writers (without excepting the learnedcr
fort of them) who fcruplc not in popular compofures to make fimilies and allufions
grounded on popular traditions and perfuafions. As for thofe common plates, which,
the method of our author's difcourfe allowed him not to decline, he hopes the reader
will difcern by his way of writing, that he loves to ufe them, not as travellers, but
as hunters ufe the highways : for the traveller, when he once gets into the road,
makes it his bufinefs to keep in it •, whereas the hunter, if he meets one lying in hi*
way, is not fond of flaying in it, but nimbly crofles it, or traverfes fo much of it,
as is requifite to be pall through in the purfuit of his game. And laftly, if in fome
few paflages of the following letter (efpecially about the beginning of it) the cxpreffions
are lefs grave and folemn than the defign \ the author hopes, that even they
will yet appear tolerably ferious, for the airicft parts of a letter, written by one young
gentleman to another.
SOME MOTIVE S
TO THE
LOVE of GOD.
My DEAREST LlND AMOR,
I A M very much delighted to learn, both by the voice of fame and the information
of much more credible relators, that Htrmionfz cold ufage has cured you of the
fever her fcorching eyes had given you : and that when once you found yourfclf referved
to /hew, what wonder her eyes were able to perform, you fealbnably refolved to become
an inftance of the power, rather of reafon, than of love and accordingly, did:
yourfclf the right to fruit rate the vain hopes, your infulting miftrefs cherilhed tomanifeft
in you, that her charms were capable to make your flame perfevcrey when
her change had made it as well caufelefs as hopelefs. I could wilh indeed for your
lake, that you owed your cure more entirely to your reafon, and lefs to your refentment
•, that the extraction of your freedom may no ways blemilh it. But fincc unallayed
fatisfactions are joys too heavenly, to fall to many men's lhares on earth, I
• In a dedication of all the forementioned letter* to my Lady T. J.
cannot
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love.
cannot but conclude, that your recovery, even on thefe terms, deferves I fhould
congratulate it i for the French fay truly, that Its plus courtes folies font Its meilleurts.
And liberty being too high a blefiing to be diveftible of that nature by circumftances i
I (that feldom deplore him, who by loling his miftrefs recovers himfclf) think, that
Hermiont has but intentionally, not eventually difobliged you; and hath made your
flames a better return, by rcftoring you your own heart, than (he could have done
by exchanging hers for it. But that which not lcaft endears to me your recovery, is,
that I am aflured by perfons, from whom I dare credit even fo welcome news, that
my endeavours proved fo happy as to be conducive to it, and that the conflderations
I ventured to prefent you, did at leaft fo far contribute to your freedom, as to give
you the deGre and the deflgn of regaining it. For, I hope* I need not tell you, that
I feldom ufe endeavours, whofe profperoufnefs is more welcome to me, than thofe
that afpire to fervc Lindamor. And though I cannot ever pay you any great lervices,
in relation to my vailly greater defires, yet I can fcarce do you little ones, in relation
to the delight refulting from the having done you any. Nor has the joy, which this
fuccefs of my difcourles brings me, been fparingly increafed by my having ventured
them with much more defire, than expectation, of their profpering } and lefs out of
any ftrong hope they would fucceed, than out of an unwillingnefs to leave the means,
I thought leaft improbable, uneflayed ; being invited to excite you to greater hopes
than 1 durit allow mylelf for you, by the example of generals, who, whatfoever diftruftful
thoughts they harbour in their breafts, fuppofe, that (before the battle) to
make their foldiers fight fuccefsfully, it is as well conducive as requifitc, by encouraging
orations, to make them think they fhall do fo. For, although I endeavoured
indeed to pcrfuade you, that rcafon being born fovcrcign of the paflions •, though
her lenity or fupincnefs do fometimes both occajion and permit their ufurpations,
lhe is feldom fo diverted of her native power, but that whenfocver fhe pleafeth to
employ what lhe hath left, fhe is able to refume what (he hath loft. And though I
was willing you lhould believe, that to perfect what your refentment had begun,
was a talk lb cafy, that the victory was as much in your power, as the refolution of
attempting it •, yet, notwithftanding all this, I fay, I was once half perfuaded, that
to undertake the curing of a lover was the next weaknefs to the being one. And,
Lindamor, to deal ingenuoufly with you, your recovery hath circumftances in it, that
make me very apprehenfive, that you are not yet out of the danger of a relapfe,
and that you have not half fo abfolutt ly abandoned your former amorous conftitution
of mind, as the former idol of it. I know, that from a perfon, who, for one that
hath never yet been hurt by Cupid is accufed of ufing him (lightly and feverely enough,
}rou will expect endeavours to preferve you from rclapies, by luch difluafions from
ove, as its votaries will fcarce vouchfafe fo mild a title to, as that of invedlivcs
againft it. And I lhall ingenuoufly acknowledge, Lindamor, that I have been fometimes
no very unready fatirift on that theme j and with a pen, reliftting of the liberty
I cherifhrd in my heart, endeavoured to dif'abufe thofe fervile fouls, that being bom
to reafon, fo far degraded themfelves, as to boaft folely an excefs of paflion ; and
had fuch low and narrow thoughts of felicity and mifery, as to expect either from a
woman's ufage. All which I thought I might the frcclicr do, becaufe having never
known the infelicities of love, but in the fufferings of others, I might probably fuppoie,
that my declamations againft it would pal's for the productions of my reafon,
not my revenge. But, Lindamor, though the extravagances of fome men's folly have
been fometiim s too great, to let ine avoid laughing fomewhat fatirically at it , yet I
am really too little an enemy to love, unlefs exceflive or mifplaced, by indiftinct and
disfiguring
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love*
disfiguring confideratioM, to repnefcnt to you the noblefli pa/Ron o£ the mind* a* its
raoflL hideous and formidable diieafe.
To love even with fome p&ffionatenels the perfon<you would marry, is not only u
allowable but expedient; being a] moil neceflary to the daty of fixing your affe&ion,
where you have once engaged your faith; for, it hath been obferved, that love doth
feldom fuffer itfelf to be confined by other matches than thole of its own making.
And few, but they, that are fo wife as they fee caufc to be almoft in love before-hand
with, thole they marry, prove fo honcft, as afterwards to be in love with none elfe.
Since therefore the marriage of a wife man fuppoies- at leaft as high a degree of love,
as he is capable to cherifh without forfeiting that title > I can fcarce difallow the being
moderately in love, without being injurious to marriage, which is a relation, that
though I can with much Ids relu&ancy permit others, than contract myfelf•, yet dare
I not abfolutely condemn a condition of life, as expedient to no man, without which,
even Paradifc and innocence were not lufficient to complete the happinels of the firft
man. Thus you lee, Lindamor, that I do not promifcuoufly quarrel with all forts of
love, but endeavour only to poffefs you with this truth, that as anciently among the
Jews there were odoriferous unguents, which it was neither unufual nor unlawful to
anoint themlelves with, or beftow upon their friends 5 but there was a certain peculiar
compofition too of a precious ointment, which God having rcferved to be employed
in his own fervice, with that the perfuming of their friends was criminal and
lacrilegious : fo there are regulated degrees of love, which it is not forbidden to
harbour for a friend, a miftrefs, or a wife ; but there is too, a certain peculiar ftrain,
or (if I may fo call it) heroic temperament of love, which, wherever it is found,
makes it belong, as unalienable, as juftly unto God. A virtuous wife may love both
her hufband's relations and her own, and yet be truly faid to love him with her whole
heart-, becaufe there is a certain unrivalled degree of kindnefs, and a peculiar fort
of love, which conftitutes true conjugal affection, that flie confines to him, and rcferves
entirely for him, and would think it criminal to harbour for any other pcrfon :
fb a religious foul may obey the command, of loving God entirely, though Ihe allow
her affections other objects ; provided they be kept in a due iubordination to, and
kept from entering into competition with, that love, which ought to be appropriated
to him j and which refults chiefly from an cither altogether, or almoft unincreafable
elevation, and vaftnefs of affection from an entire refignment to, and an abfolutc
dependence on, the loved party •, from a rcftlcfs difquict upon the leaft fenfe or doubt
of her difpleafure ; from a greater concern in her interefts, than one's own ; from an
expectation of no lei's than felicity or wretchednefs from her friendfhip or indignation
i or at leaft, a pcrfuadednefs, that nothing can be a greater happinefs, ihan her
favour, or deferve the name of happinefs without it. For, wherever a paflion has
thefe properties, or any of them, confpicuous in it ; it cannot, but by being confecrated
to God, avoid becoming injurious both to to him and to itlelf. The very
noblenefs of it entitles him to it ; as in fome kingdoms (and particularly here in
England) though veins of coarfer metals may belong to the owner of the foil they
grow in, yet all the mines of the more perfect metals (as gold and filver) are by the
law made mines royal, and belong to the king, to whom their value appropriates them.
By reflecting upon this peculiar notion of love, you may be pleafed, Lttidamor, to interpret
fuch indefinite exprefiions as you may meet with in the following difcourfe.
And this love I have taken the freedom to ftyle Seraphic Loi'e (not out of any affectation
of tumid words or titles, but) borrowing the name from (if the Romifh divines
be good nurlhals of the heavenly hoft) thofe nobler fpirits of the celeftial
Vol. I. K k hierarchy,
Digitized by Google
250 Seraphic Love.
hierarchy, whofc name * in the language to which it belongs, exprefles them to be of
a flaming nature; and whofe employment (mentioned in the evangelical prophet's
\u. ti.i, my llerious vifion) fufficiently points at the divine object, to which the flames, that
warm them, afpire and tend. And methinks, Lindamor, that you fhould find it no
faint invitation to embrace Seraphic Love, that you may have the advantage, by
roaking yourlclf a rival to thefe glorious fpirits, to make them your friends, and the
honour to be engaged in a fervicc, where you arefure of fuch illuftrious concurrents.
At leaft if you be of the mind of that generous youth (to whofc fuccefsful valour
the conquered world was both theatre and trophy) who refufed to run at the Olympic
games, becaufe there were no monarchs to run with him. But I fear, Lindamor^
J have a little digrefled ; fince I might have told you in fewer words, that it is not
my defign in this paper to declaim againft love in general, or make a folemn harangue
of the fick lends of women ; and that therefore, as when young gallants
(fuch as you, Lindamor) are fubject to caft away their love upon unfit objects, their
difcreet friends (lenfible of the truth of the Italian comic's oblcrvation, that
Onefta contra* amort
E treppofrale fchermo
In giovinetto cuore
;
In youthful hearts bare virtue's wont to prove
But a waiflkU againft the darts of love :)
without taking a'-.y nv-re than ncccflary notice of their former fond and draggling
paflions, reclaim them by cither matching them, or at lealt (in order thereunto) engaging
their addrefles to perfons, whofe beauty or prerogatives may both legitimate
or confine their affections : lb 1 lhall now endeavour to prevent the future gaddings
of your lovr to objects, that cannot deferve fo tranfeendent and difinterdled a one,
as 1 have obferveo yours to have been •, by preferring and engaging it to the true
object, that pafiion born to, the noblcft it can afpire to, and the moft fatisfying
it can enjoy. Yes, / indamor, as it has hitherto been my not-unprofperous talk to
unh'jod your foul, 1 fliall now make it my bufinefs to fhew her game to fly at. I fee,
that love in Undamer is too noble and predominant an affection, to be either eafy or
fu to be destroyed. It will therefore be my defign, not tofupprcls your flame, but to
addrefs i:. I wilhed it withdrawn from Hcrmione, not to annihilate it, but to transfi
dure it t would not have a paffion, whic h warned nothing, but a due object, to be
fraphic love, like vulgar men, be fwallowed up by death, the common fatej bL| t
be enn bk i, by a deltiny l.kc that of lincch and Elias, who, having ccafed to con-
Vv'rfe with moir.ls, died not, but were tranflatcd into heaven.
Sr:f x. Wh o has been laid already, I.i>.>Junior, hath, it feems, fufficed to rectify your
love ; by difabufiny; it, and (hewing you, how unfitly it was placed on its former objects.
Your [.rvlicicncy in that invites me to proceed with you to a new leflbn, and
( mindful of that true iuyir.g of an eminent father, Nemo aliqncm amat, quern non vult
tjl'e tinlicrem) to endeavour to exalt your pallion by directing and fettling it upon an
oojeCt, the due contemplation of whofe lovclinefe may cure as perfectly all hurts re-
• The farre Srrttplim, in Hebrew, fprirt;s from the root Sarepb, which fignifies to burn or flame :
whence, Ktmk xxi. 0. thtifi: perniciona creatures, thai our tranilatois cn^lilh, fury ftrptnti, arc fiylcd
in ttK origir.al llanittcb-tj'tut liei-ftiaflm,
ceived
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 251
ccivcd from any mortal beauty, as anciently the fight of the myfterious ferpent on
the pole did cure the hurts the fiery ferpents gave. For, fince to gaze ttedfaitly on ^"
"
J
b '
an outward beauty, where all your looking will but difcover the fame face, is found
fo effectual to kindle or to blow the fire of love (which the Greeks prettily enough
exprefs by their «*t3 ifxv yUtrxt t« if*») how much mult a due contemplation enamour
us of that divine, and, though refulgent, yet ever more and more d.lcoverablc object,
where attention and wonder flill mutually excite and chcrilh each other ? wh ncc
the zealoufeft and perfected lovers of God are the glorious angeb, of whom our
Saviour fays, that in heaven, they always behold theface of bisfather which is in heaven ; U«. «vui.
and thofe blcffcd faints, whofe employment, and whofe happinels is, in the Revela- 10-
lion, expreffed to be, to follow the lamb wbitberfoever be goes. And thole unblemilhed Rc»-
pcrfons are in that place recorded to have kept themfelves undcfilcd by mortal beau- **
ties, to teach us, that the nearer and clearer intuition, that heaven affords them of
the glorious object of their paffion, was not the caufc of it, but the recompcncc
and that whilft they lived exiles here on earth, it was fuch a Speculation, as I am recommending
(Lindamor) to you, wherewith they lived to borrow the cxpreffion ufed
of Mofes) as feeing bim who is invijtble -, a fight, whofe glory made them look on H*b. *i.
fading beauties with as undazzled and untroubled eyes, as eagles can be fuppofed to
* 7-
call on glow-worms, when they have been newly gazing on the fun.
To engage your love, lindamor, to this fublimell of objects, 1 fhall defirc, thats</?. 3.
all that I have faid to divert your former flames, and all that may fay to depreciate
and difcredit thofe degrading and difquieting amours, that arc wont to inveigle mortals,
may be looked upon as meant, rather by way of preparative, than of motive,
aiming but to difabufe and rectify your mind, that with compofed and unprepofiefied
thoughts you may judge of the object I propofe to you. Which to qualify you to be
but impartial to, this method feemed expedient •, being but imployed upon fuch a
fcore, as that on which the Platonifts ufed to premife certain virtues, which th.-y
(fignificantly enough) called purgative, to difpole and fit the mind for the reception
of fublimer truths. As phyficians to clear the fight are wont to purge the head,
that the eye, freed from all darkening and difguifing tinctures, may the more perfectly
difcern the objects presented to it. Anil certainly, the love I would pcrfiude, is of a
nature, that makes nothing more conducive to it than the givateit unci judednefs of
the eye, and the perfcctelt illuftration of the object; which is fuch, that the cleareit
reafon is the molt advantageous light it can ddire to be fecn by You know the ltory
of that witty wench, who ufed merrily to wiih her lovers all good qualities, but a
good understanding ; for that, faid ihie, would make them out of love with me. The
divine object, to which I would prefer you, Lindcmor, is fo far from being obnoxious
to a danger of that nature, that I need not diiparage any other to enamour you of
this. For, the Creator is too full of excellences to need to be recommended or let
off by the creature's defects. He was fovercignly lovely in himfelf, before the y had
a being ; nor has his giving us that paffion, called love, nude him the unfittcr object
for it. To love God, but becaufc your miftrefs has perfonal faults, is a greater,
than any of thofe, for which you have declined her , and is fuch a loloecifm in feraphic
love, as it were in the Perfian religion (for that has yet embracers in the Fait,
as thofe, that have there converfed with them, allure me) to make the Spots, that
blrmifh the moon, the motives of their worfhipping the fun. HtTHHOJU is a'lady, to
whofe noble relations I am too much a fervant, not to have a refpect for her ; and I
cannot without concluding her an extraordinary perfon, remember, how lately the
enjoyed the honour of captivating Lindamor •, and though Ihc has fincc, by injurioufly
K k 2 declining,
I
Digitized by Google
2 £2 Seraphic Love.
, declining, juftly forfeited the glorious title of his miftrefe; yet the qualities, that
gave it her, made me, among divers others, like her lb well, that it is now my quarrel
to her, that (he is not what file was. And therefore whatever may fall from my
pen to her difadvantage, relates to her but as ihe was, or may again be, an obftacle to
your devotednefs to feraphic love. To engage you to which (alf this notwithftanding)
Lixdamer, I mud do you the right to tell you, that God deferves the higheft elevation
of your love, though Hermime had not rejected it. Were fhc not only as handfome
as you fancied her, but as conftant as you wifiied her, her beauty and herfriendlhip
too concurring could not have made her other than as difadvantageous as injurious
a rival unto God j and, in the very fruition of as obliging returns, as herkindneis
could have made your paffion, fiic would have deferved.bat a more moderate
degree of it. Angels, to whom women were never falfc or cruel, love their Maker
Rn.nii. above all things: and he to whom St. John prcfents his adoration, rcfufed it for him-
4.»nd fc\f to diredt it unto God. Would not yourfclf, Ujtdamor, have thought your Heratone
abfolutely handfome, though Moors had not worn the devil's livery ; and the
thing called deformity had been as much a ftranger, as it is unwelcome to her fcx ?
It is true, fuch is our frailty, that, as the Ifraelites needed a cruel and opprefllve
bondage in Egypt, to make them rcfolve on returning to the blefled land of Canaan ;
lb oftentimes, the amorous fotd needs the harlh ufage of a difdainful miftrcis, to difguft
it with its thraldom, and make it afpire to its more genuine and fatisfying object.
I may therefore allow Hermsone's defects to have given you freedom and occafion
to confider the prerogatives of Seraphic Love ; but I mult not allow them to be
the chief motives of your embracing it. For, it were too injurious to its glorious
object, to make that but the refuge of a defeated paffion, whofe tranicendency entitles
it to more than the moft elevated and entire one. Alas, God needs not thefc beggarly
parallels with any fading objects, to become that of our difabufed devotion j
and he were lovely without companion, as well as he is fo above it. And though I
be not fo unjuft to deny, that there are ladies (lbme of which I have the happinefs
not to be unknown to myfelf) whofe excellencies are capable of ennobling theif whole
fex : yet their greateft accomplifhmcnts compared to his perfections, whofe gifts they
are, are, in that eclipfing company, as inconfpicuous as the faint qualities of more
ordinary perfons. As when in a clear morning, the rifing-fun vouchfafes to vifit us,
as well thofe bright ftars that did adorn our hemifphere, as thofe dark Ihades that did
benight it, vanilh : confonantly whercunto, give me leave to obferve to you, Lindamor,
that though divers of God's attributes arc through his goodnefs participated by
his creatures, yet the fcripturc makes fo vaft a difparity betwixt the excellencies, that
it afcribes to men, and the fame perfections confidered as they exift in God, that it
feems abfolutely to exclude created beings from any title to thofe attributes j becaufe
they poflefs them but in a way fo inferior to that tranlcendent, peculiar, and divine
manner, in which they belong to God. Thus our Saviour fays to him, that (taking
Mi», him but for a man) called him good, Why calltft theu me good ? there is none good but
iV».\i. "** that is> Ced- Thus St Pm! calls God ( or Chrift) the only potentate,
15.
' though the earth be fhared by feveral potentates ; and even the devout eunuch in the
/at ,ui
' Acls, and the depoled grandees mentioned by the bleffed virgin in her canticle, are,
tikei. 5». in the original, ftilcd potentates. Thus, there be wife virgins as well as foolifli, and
Mat, u».
jhQugfo our Saviour tells us, that the children of this world are in their generations
l ktiri.8. voifer than the children of tight ; yet St. Paul fcruplcs not to term his Maker, The only
fc wife God: and thus he ellewhere paraphrafes him, He that hath only immortality, though
iTim.^ angels and human fouls be deathlels. In fo incommunicable a manner does the fupe-
'*•
riority
3
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love, 253
riority of God's nature make him poffefc thofe very excellencies, which the diffufivenefs
of his good ne is. makes him pleafed to communicate. I am the more zealous,
Lindamor, to transfigure your love into devotion (which I mull defire you to look
upon but but as a varied narneibr Seraphic Lave) becaufe I have obferved your pafiion
to have been extremely impatient of confinement, and to have efteemcd whatever
.may be termed limits, to be prifons. Few therefore can need more, or deferve better,
an object for their love, for which too inunenfe a vaftnefc were impoflible. And fuch
a one is God, whofe fovereign perfections render him fo uncapable of being loved too
jnuch, that the moftafpiring paffion can tcaree arrive (fo much as) to leifen its difjproportion
to the object. Other paflions, like other rivers, are molt liked, when they
calmly flow within their wonted banks ; but of Strapbic Love, as of Nilus, the very
inundations might be delireable, and his overflowings make him the more welcome.
.For mortal beauties, our pillions are .like ourfelves : if our ftatute chance to exceed
a certain fize or ilandard, it makes us monltious ; but devotion is like a flawlefs diamond,
where the bignefs taxes the value, and the unufual bulk both rates and inhances
the luftre and the price. To give God all our love is the greateft command
both of the law and gofpel (in its capacious and teeming womb, both comprizing and
cherilhing all the other ferviccs God requires) and that there is not more exacted of
us, is not, that an addition were culpable, but becaufe it is impoflible. So noble is
the nature of devotion, that it admits of failings but by one of the extremes, which is
that, of defect. For, mediocrity (whofe office it is to rcftrain us from approaching
the utmoft limits) which in other paflions is an excellence, is here an imperfection.
Or, at leaft, if mediocrity be that, which creates paflions virtues, the mediocrity of
this love mud confift in the boundkffhi-fs of it, fince that is it, which makes it mod
a virtue. The man after God's own heart, is not afraid to own, even to his Maker, PC,-*J«' ,»
an ardency of love for him, which muft be exprcflcd by the fignificant metaphor of
thirft , and that -fuch a thirft too, as makes the panting hart (by naturalifls obferved
to be a very dry creature) bray (as I remember the Hebrew hath it) for thofe refrefhftreams,
whofe want diftreflcs and reduces her to an almoft gafping condition : My
vtry foul (faith he) tbirftetb for God. And we know, that thirft is not only fo violent *^ft''r>«
an appetite, that it leflbns the wonder of that monarch's bargain, whom hiftory rccords
to have parted with his kingdom for a cup of water ; but thirft doth fo confine ££b«, j\
our longings to what it craves, that nothing clfe can fatisfy them. The wealth of 4-fj'"«
both the Indies would not excufe the want of a needed cup, fuppofing their pofleflbr *v/.
J
i.
tormented with an appetite, which cannot be quenched but by drink. To which I
muft add, that the uneafinefs of unrelieved thirtt is not, like that of other inconveniences,
leflencd by continuance, but grows by lading the more unfupportable.
The fame inlpircd poet fcruples not alio to profefs fo fcnfible and fo active a concern
for God's intcrefts, that the zeal of God's boufc bad eaten him up ; and hugely troubled
he is, that others are not affected with the fame zeal. Ibtbdd (fays he) the tranfgref- 9UL «:«-
fors, and was grieved, becaufe they kept not tby word. Nay, rivers of waters, fays he, '*
run down mine eyes, becoufe they kept not tby law. And to manifeft how much the ten- liJm ,.r.
dernefs and unrefervedntfs of his love made him think thole his friends or enemies, ,J**
that were fo to God; Mine eyes, (fays he) fball be upon tbe faithful of the land, that pc,i.a.f»
tbty may dwell with me: be tbat walketb perfect in tbe way, he fballferve me. Do not
hate them, OLord, tbat bate Ibee, and am not I grieved with thofe, that rife up againjl""'^
thee? 1 bate them with a perfetl hatred, I count tbem mine enemies. At this rate did
pious David love his Maker ; but he was fo far from thinking this rate exceflive, that,
tranlportcd by the fenfe of hispcrlbnal difability to pay that divine object all the love,
that
Digitized by Google
25+ Seraphic Love.
that his perfections merited, he is not content to roufe up all his own faculties to praifc
pf.i. <i». t. (; otj f Kiefs the Lord., O myfoul, <'i oil that is witbin me blefs bis Holy Name) bur he
p&U«niL invites all the godly to affift him it, he payment of lb vaft a debt •, Love ibe Lcrdt all
tUm )'e fi"its, fory &c. And again, Pt li/e the Lord, all ye nations, praife bim all pie.
cx«>rii.i. And not content neither frequently i > do this, as may appear by very many i ages
of his facred poems, he extends his invitation to the angels, and all the other holts of
God, and concludes the book of Pfaims with a, Let every thing, that bath bieatb,
prai/e ibe l^ord. Hallelujah.
•cft.4. j^OR <joes lt invalidate what has n'.w been delivered, that fomemen have, even by
devout pcrlbns, been blamed for ton much devotion; for, it wis not an ex a 1
; of
love, but a want of difcretion, that was guilty of their faults : the expreflions of our
love to God ought to be regulated, nor by our bitnd and wild fancies^ bu r by his
revealed will (as Chrift fays, if you lav* •, keep my commandments.) And t ^retore
it is very pofliblc to be too devout, not becaute any cxprcfiion of Serapbic Love can
be made with too much ardency, whilft it is co: fideied abltracledly in itfclf, and
irrelatively to die reft •, but becaufc that there being feveral duties of love, which
require an ardency of it, it is injurious to cxercilV all that in one alone, or a few,
that belongs equally to the neglected others. We mult not (as too many profefibrs
are now wont to do, of whofe error you may receive a fuller account in fome other
pipers) dafh in pieces the two tables of the law againlt one another ; but mult fo
love God with all our hearts, as to love our neighbour as ourfdves. You know what our
Saviour faith to the Pharifees, that tithed mint and cummin, with a neglect of judg-
Mit.xiiii. mcnt, mercy, anil faith, thole weightier matters of the law, Tbefe ought you {*Su)
xy
to have done, and net to leave the other undone. And indeed this partiality, Lindamcr,
which makes us difplay lo much of the flrcngth and vigour of our fpirits in fome
favourite duties, that we can but languidly and perfunctorily perform thofe others
we arc lefs fond of, begets in devotion a difeafe, not unlike that new one in children
we call the rickets, which fome learned phyficians do not improbably conceive to
raife from the unequal nutrition of the parts. For though none of them receive excefT'ive
nourifhmcnt, yet fome of them receiving as much as is convenient for them,
and thereby growing up to their natural bignefs, whilfl others are lefs nourifhcd than
(were the body healthful) they would be, do grow to little, that the founder parts
feem overgrown, and fo the disproportion betwixt them and the ricketing ones makes
the whole body they compote mifhapen and unwieldy. But, Lindamcr, this proves
not, that we can love God too much, but only that we may employ too much of that
jobi*. 19.
j0VL,^ j n jfjj;. or t jiat way Qf ^pre/Ting it. Whilfl we are (as 'fib fpeaks) Inhabitants
t
_ of tbefi bcufes cf flay, there are many duties, which do as well challenge an intenlity
l», jj. 34 °f our affections, as thole which relate more immediately to God. As St. Paul
tells us, that there is difference betwixt married and fingle pcrfons, the affections of
the one being at liberty to devote thcmfelves more undiltractedly to God, whereas
thofe of the other are detracted •, (as yJdam's were betwixt his Maker and his rib).
But where a direct and immediate expn llion of love to God defrauds not any other
duty, there it is free from the danger of excefs. Though prayers may cafily be too
long, and fafts grow exorbitant ; yet Chrift could fpend the whole night in prayer,
and fall forty days without immodcratenefs, when the other expreflions of his love to
iKin;« his Father, and the other exerciles of his mediatory function, were not thereby difhitbtd,
but furthered end promoted. And fo Elijah might inculpably fail iong,
when that faffing did not difable him to profecute his journey to the mount of God;
end though jult men here on earth mull cxprcls their love to their mailer by (that bufy
diffracting,
• 1
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love.
diftracting, and remoter way of fervice) trading with his talent trutred to them ; yet
when their divefturc of mortality dilpenfes them for thofe laborious and avocating
duties to diftrefied Chriflians, and their own fecular relations, which arc here requifue
to be performed •, their glorified fpirits may now, without any immoderate devotion,
employ, 1 lay not, their time, but their eternity itfclf, in converling with God, and
following the Lamb whithcrlbever he goes. And congruoully 1 obferve, that the Kn. i».
four mylterious beads, allowed to approach neareft to the throne of God, though 6»
their many wings, and more numerous eyes, intimate them of a very active nature,
are reprcfented to us in the apocalypfe, as addicted but to one employment, ceafing
neither day nor night from faying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty ; and from «** «.
giving glory* an^ honour, and thanks unto him. And of thofe that have wtited their robes
in the blood of the Lamb, this account is in the fame book given us, that they are be R«». »ir.
fere the throne of God, and ferye him by day and night in his Temple. So true is it, that * *
no degree of Seraphic Love can be exceflive ; nay, not any expreflion of it immoderate,
unlefs it be made fo, not by its greatnefs, but by its usurpation, whereby it
either ingrolfes or invades what belongs to its injured and languifhing aflbciates. Our
love unto the creatures is a prcfent, but unto God it is a tribute •, and though we may
eafily play the prodigals in parting (over-freely) with our gifts, we can fcarce be fo
in the payment of our debts •, for, be the fums never fo vaft we pay away, their
being due, in fpight of their being great, makes the dilburlcment too much an act
of juftice, to be one of profufenefs Seraphic Love (whole paflionatcnefs is its beft
complexion) has then moll approached its noblcft meafure, when it can leaft be meafurcd
; nor aught its extent to admit any other limits, than an utter difability to exceed
thofe that terminate it. F or he alone loves God as much as he ought, that, loving
him as much as he can, drives to repair the deplored imperfection of that love, with
an extreme regret to find his love no greater. Such a fublimity of love will beft entitle
you to the confolation accruing from that memorable pallage of St. John, where
he fays, that God is love, and be that dwelletb in trot dvselktb in God, and God in him ; .job. ;T.
which fupplics me with a forcible inducement, to invite you to an eager afpiring to a
tranfeendency in devotion, fince it may render felf-denial foeafy, that it will (atlaft)
almoft diveit that name. For this fublimer love being, by an intimate conjunction
with its object, wholly devoted to it, and throughly refined from all bafe drofs of
felfilhnefs and intereft, nobly begets a moft llrict union of our wills with God's (or
rather) a perfect fubmiCion of the one to the other. And thus, when it is become
your will to obey his, no diipenfations of providence will immoderately difquiet
you : for, you poffefs your wilhes in general, and in bulk, though pofiibly not always
in retail. For, your chiefeft defire being to lee your Maker's will fulfilled, your
knowledge of his being the iovereign and uncontrolled dilpofer of the events allures
you, that all accidents that can bcial you, are but exact accompliihmcnts of his will,
and consequently of yours, lb far forth as that is included and comprized in his.
Whun you have rcligned, or rather conligned, your expropriated will (if 1 may fo
call it) to God, and thereby (as it were) entnilted him to will for you ; all his dilpofals
of, and his diipenfations towards you, are in effect the acts of your own will,
with the advantage of their being directed and fpecified by him : an advantage, that
_ does at once aft'ure you both of their rectitude and fuccefs. God's wifdom, power,
<„and love to you conlidered, how much more happy muft you be in your opinions of
his chuiing for you, than your immediate own ? The patient thinks himfclf obliged
to gratity his phyfician for chufiug for him what Ibrts of meat he is to feed on ;
though the doctor be wont to make fuch a choice for him, as deprives him of the
7 difhes
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love.
ditties he heft likes, and oftentimes confines him to thofe he loaths. Alas, how often
might God fay of our requefts, as Chrift did of thofe of the two afpiring difciples,
Te know not what to afki I admire and bluQi to read in an heathen fatyrift ft> heavenly
a leflbn, as,
Permittes ipjis expendere numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebufquejit utile nojtris :
Nam projucundis utilia qtueque dabunt dl.
Chart or eft illis homo, quam Jibi : nos animorum
Jmpulfu, 6? C4tca pravaque cupidine du3i,
Conjugiutn petimus partumque uxoris \ at Wis v .
Notum, qui pueri, qualifque futurajit uxor.
* Unto thewifer gods the care permit,
* Of what's for us and our affairs moft fit.
* They will for pleafant things the belt confer j
« To whom man is than to himfclf more dear,
* We by our blinder paflions led aftray,
« Do for a wife perhaps or children pray
;
* Which they may chance refufe us out of love,
* Knowing what both the wife and boys would prove.*
The confideration ofwhich made a heathen philofopher fay, that he was wont only
in general terms to beg good things of the gods, leaving it to them to determine what
things were good for him. And indeed our own wifhes are but too commonly as
©«». nn. ^lind as &KMFftj who having fo eagerly longed for children, that lhe impatiendy
*. ' " cries, give mt children or elfe I die, died in child-bearing-, and as deftrucrive to the
wiihera, as their longings proved to the murmuring I/ratlites, who loathing the
N1un.1i.3j. wholefome manna (that bread of angels) God had provided for them, are their own
bane in the flefh they had fo greedily lufted for. Thus, Lindamer, that fo affrighting
virtue of fclf-denial proves to be little more than a Ton's letter of attorney to his
father, of whofe paternal kindnefs and confummate abilities in the management of
affairs his confidence amounts unto a certainty. Nay, till my fecond thoughts checked
the over-forward impetuofity of my firft, I was about to add, fince God refents
an infinite fatisfa&ion in the accomplifhment of his own will, your making over your
whole will to God will impart to you that felicity, proportioned to the degree of the
refignment. And as the eye, whilft by the optic nerve tied unto the head, fo changed,
can tafte delights, which it is dead to, being once fevered from it, though (otherwife)
it enjoy the beft condition of which its inanimate nature can be fuppofed to be capable;
fo may your will, by an identity or famcnefs (in tendency, though not in
nature) with your Maker's, as it were engrafted into God's, receive a new and enlarged
capacity, which will enable you to contain and relifh joys, highly tranfeending
thofe, which the fulled fruition of your private wifhes were able to create. Thus
felf-dcnial is a kind of holy affociation with God, and (by making you his partner)
intereils you in all his happinefs and acquifuions. And confonantiy we ice, that
glorified faints and blefled angels, whofe will have the moft exquifitc and exact conformity
to God's, enjoy a happinefs moft approaching his ; whereas the apoftate
fpirits, in a confirmed repugnancy to his will, find the extremity of wretchednefs.
But
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. *$7
But though I dare not own, Lindamor, fo bold a fally, yet I dare without fcruple s«
improve the difcourfe that preceded it, to make out to you an advantageous difference
of Serapbick Love from ordinary flames. For, he that makes a prefent of his heart to
any mortal beauty, even by her welcoming it, and lodging it with her own, grows
fubjed to have it wounded in her brcalt. Thofe misfortunes reach him, that would
otherwife terminate in her : her afflictions torment him, whilft his own reprieve him \
and the felicity of two pcrfons grows requifite to make one happy. The letting out
our love to mutable objects doth but enlarge our hearts, and make them the wider
marks for fortune, and capable of being wounded in more places : for, although love
may as well make us participate the joys, as refent the infelicities of the parties loved
yet even the leaft unhappy perfons do in fo fickle and fo tempeftuous a lea, as we all
find this world, meet with fo many more either Crofs winds, or ftormy gufts, than profperous
gales-, and we are fo much more fenfible of pain than pleafure (an aching torn,
though lefs than a ficknefs, unfitting us to relifh the otherwife perfect health of the
whole body) that even fricndfliip itfclf, though a much calmer affedton than love,
ought to be declined as injurious to our quiet, did we confider it but as a partncrinip
of fortunes, not an exercile of virtues. But he, whofc wifer love fettles itfelf on God,
is not only, by the immutable, and even efiential happinefs of that adorable object,
fecured from participated infelicities -, but finds his perfonal crofies and diftrcfics
fweetened by confidering, that what he mod loves is molt happy, and as able as willing
in due time to make him fo. And though Serapbick Love make us partake but
God's felicities, yet his acceptance of it makes him refent our forrows. In all tbeir lu'- Ui'"i
cffiitJicns be was afflifled, fays the prophet of God, and of the Ifraelitcs. And fo
the Son of God (who is fo much one with thofe that love him, that both he as the
head, and they as die members, are fometimes, as making up one body, called by
one name, Chrift) though as high as heaven, above the reach of perfonal or imme- » Cot. &
diate perfecutions, called our to Saul for an intention of harming thofe that loved
him, Saul, Saul, wby perfecuteji tbou me ? and to demonftrate the tendcrnels of this
compalfion, the prophet fays to the returned lfraelites, concerning God, He tbat zt&, a. i.
toucbetb you, toucbetb tbe apple of bis eye. Nor is God's companion like a miftrefs's,
a grieving only, and an ufelefs pity, whereby the iuffcring lover is oftentimes lefs
comforted, as it proceeds from her kindnefs, than afflided, becaufe it breeds her difquiet
, but God'a is a companion, though active, yet ferene, and worthy of himfelf,
which without producing the difcompofure, produces the effeds of the moft fenfible
pity, by engaging him to a timely relief and refcue : as that frefhly mentioned expreffion,
In all their affiiSions be was afflitled, is immediately followed by, and the
angel of bis prefence faved tbm ; in bis love, and in bis pity be redeemed tbem, and be
bare tbem and carried tbem all tbe days of old. Yes, this pity, for its not difturbing
God's happinefs, inclines him not the lefs to exprefs a fenfe of our mileries, and
makes us find (to ufe a fcripture phrafe, as I would render it) <>V iv*3ft» |3»nd(i«* Hckn. 16.
{grace for an opportune relief) 1 fay, with the divine writer, an opportune or feafonahU
relief becaufe it comes not always when it is moft defircd, but when it is moft fit
and when that is, he that hath at once all prefent, pad, and future things in his profped,
is fitcft to determine. Chrift's words to his difciples, // is not for you to know AQt L 7>
tbe times or tbe feafons, wbicb tbe Father hatb put in bis own power, are applicable to
more cafes than that which occafioned them. The Canaanitilh woman muft put up a Mat. ttt.
re fuial, and the reproachful name of a dog (which yet, by the way, was a para- * 7 "
phrafe commonly enough ufed by the Jews of the heathen, and as fuch was underftood
by this 'Eaai»,'{ Gentile not Greek •.) The Ifraelitcs (comprifing the patriarchs
• The ttsi rtfen her «'r*3iea to Sjrtpl^irU, the (.m» region with &«*««.
Vol. I. L 1 their
2 5 8 Seraphic Love.
their progenitors) were reduced to wait four hundred and thirty years, ere they were
c«i 17. introduced into the promifcd land , and during a great part of that long fpace of
time, languished and groaned under the heavy burdens, and other as heavy prcflures
EKkie! of the as cruelly as unfuccefsfully politick Egyptians. St. Paul himfelf prayed the
"co'r.
** Lord thrice for the removal of that rude «t»a«iJ< ti5 <r#f*i, thorn to the flefh (whatever
t.t.i. that may mean). Nay, of the blefled virgin-mother herfelf, her divine Son would
Lvkt " ^ not be found till the third day, though fhe lought him forrowing. And Lazarus, to
whom, even during his ficknefs, he vouchfafed (a title, to which all Cafar's were
joh. i. «,. but trifles) the ftyk of friend, which emboldened the pious Mary to paraphrafe him
*• by a be whom thou loveft, was permitted not only to lie a dying, but to die ; his refcue
being deferred, till it was thought impoflible, and was fo indeed to any lefs power
than omnipotence. Which manitelts, that as no degree of diftrefs is unrelieveablc
by his power, fo no extremity of it is inconfiftent with his companion, no not with
m»i. B, j. his fricndfliip. FJe, whofe fpirit infpired the prophets, is in the laft of them reprefentcd
under the notion of a refiner : and it is not the cuftom of refiners to fnatch the
beloved metal out of the fire, as foon as it feels the violence of that purifying element
1 nay, nor as foon as it is melted by it, but they let it long endure the brunt of
the active flames, actuated by exciting blafts, till it have flood its due time in the
fire, and there obtained its full purity and fplendor. And I hope', you will give one,
that converfes with furnaces, though he be no pretender to the philofopher's ftone,
leave to implore a chymical metaphor, and obferve, that though in afflictions, efpecially
national or publick calamities, God oftentimes fecms to make no diftindtion betwixt
the objects of his compaflion, and thofe of his fury, indifcriminately involving them
in the fame deftiny yet his prefciencc and intentions make a vaft; difference, where
his inflictions do not feem to make any : as when on the fame teft, and with the felffamc
fire, we urge as well the gold, as the blended lead or antimony ; but with foreknowing
and defigning fuch a difparity in the events, as to confume the ignobler
minerals, or blow them off into drofs or fumes, and make the gold more pure and
full of luftre.
Sea. 6. It is true, Lindamor, and (not to be fufpected of partiality towards a love, which
fo little needs it to be thought fit to be preferred before all other paffions) I fhall
acknowledge it, that the happinefs relulting from thofe many prerogatives 1 have
endeavoured to difcovcr to you in a tranfeendent degree of Serapbitk Love, is moderated
by the effects of that Sublimity, the eager defires it creates of a more complete
fruition, of its perfect and divine object. Such afpiring fallies of the longing foul
c»»t. ii. j. made the languifhing fpoufe in the Canticles cry out, Stay me -with flagons, comfort me
PUk i. *j. with apples, for I am Jick of love. Such made the ravifhed apoftlc defire to return
• Lui.xii. (for fo I Ihould rather tranflate the word, *»*Au*«», there, and fo I find it • clfcwhere
s6, to fignify) and to be with Cbrift : and the infpired poet thus exprefies his longings to
Mil. ill the blefled object of them, As the hart pantetb after the water-brooks, fo pantetb my
*' *• foul after thee, O God. My foul tbirftetb for God, for tbe living God: when fball I come
and appear before God? But, Lindamor, it was fit, that to elevate our thoughts and
wifhes to heaven, fomc peculiar, and clfewhere incommunicable degree of joy fliould
be referved for us there. And it is a good fign, and fuch as worldly objects cannot
boaft, when the incompleatnefs of our Serapbick Lover** happinefs, in his fruitions,
proceeds not from their want of fatisfactorincls, but his want of an entire pofleffion
of them. And let me tell you, Lindamor, that even this uneafy ftate of fcparation is
fweetcned with as much allay as is confiftcnt with its being a grief. For, the divine
evidence and teacher of God's love pronouncing a thirft after perfection to be a title
»h.t.«. to ^ (according to thole Scriptures, BUJfed art tbey tbat hunger and tbirjl after rigbte-
3 eufnefs ;
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love.
eufnefst fortbeyfhallbefalisfied: and, Let him that is atbirfl come, and wbofoever will, " '•
let inn take of the water cf life freely) and the joys of heaven being fo vaft, that they
' r*
diftule their nature to all the grounded hopes men have to obtain them ; each new
aflurance is a new degree of them, and is acceptable to our hope, though uncafy to
our defires. And thele baitings at complcat felicity fhould not be more unwelcome for
the prefent diiquiet they fuppofc, than the contrary for the zeal they argue, and the
felicity they promifc. For this production of the fpirit in our hearts may be juftly
termed as the Spirit himfeff in fcripture is, an earneft ; which though, by baring fuch, iCor.v. 5.
it confefles itfelt not to be the entire fum, yet it is not only a part of it, but a pledge :
and, Lindamor, how fupportable is this thus qualified allay of the joys of Serapfyck
Love, in comparifon of die difquiets, and the torments, that are wont to attend*
fenfual love ? I lhall not lofe [time] to enumerate how many it is fuppofed to have
fent to their graves •, becaufc, though I find thofe tragical ftories rife enough irv
romances, yet 1 find them rarities every where but in thofe fabulous compofurcs
:
and though I have had the curiofity to vifit fomc of thofe warmer regions, where the
flames or love are thought to burn with more violence, yet (bating the duels and the
pox) I remember not to have obferved love to have ever been the death of any man 1
unlels, fpeaking like philofophers, who make reafon the cfiential conftituent form
of a man, we will affirm, that love, by dethroning reafon, though it leave the lover
alive, doth kill the man. But, though I am loth to put fo bad a compliment upon
mankind, as to lay, that love is wont to deftroy men's lives j yet 1 think it would be
no calumny to fay, it much difquiets them. 1 could afk you, bow long many a lover
muft continue a lervant, to purchafe the honour of being taken notice of to be fo ?
And I could recruit that queftion with pretty ftore of others of the like nature; but
that I fuppofe your memory will fave my pen the labour of reprcfenting to you the
torments of love, which they that feel them, would little lels juftly than they do
frequently ftyle martyrdoms, if the greatnefs only, without the caufe and object of
men's fufferings, fufficed to make them martyrs. And though the condition of lovers
be in romances fo dextroufly and delightfully defcribed, that not only fanguine readers
are tranfported, but even 1 myfclf have been furprized into inclinations, to admire
and envy their felicity ; yet when fome, I was concerned for, have been really concerned
and engaged in fome adventures, my envy quickly turned into pity, for, the
repulfes, the regrets, the jealoufies, the fears, the abfenecs, the defpairs, and the reft
of the afflicting difquiets of lovers ; though in well-writ romances they arc foon read
over by the diverted purfucr, yet they are not fo foon weathered out, nor fo eafily fuppoited
by thedifconfolate lover i whofe infelicities, though they may be perhaps fo handfomcly
deplored, as to delight the reader, yet truft me, Lindamcr, it is a much happier
condition to be free from misfortunes, than to be able to complain eloquently of them.
And as I have with delight beheld a ftorm excellently drawn by fome rare artift's
pencil •, but when 1 was this fpring toft by the rude winds, that blew me out of Holland,
I found a real ftorm a very troublcfomc and uneafy thing : fo the condition of
a lover, though drawn by a fmooth pen, is wont ftrangely to affect and plcafe us
;
yet when men are really engaged in it, they find it full of hardfhips and difquict. It
is a much better condition to be looked on than embraced ; and experience gives
men of it (faddtr and) more unwelcome notions than defcription did. Nor fancy,
Lindamory that the troublefomcnefs of your fufferings in love proceeded but from
their not being acceptable to her, for whom you endured themj tor had your miftrefs
crowned them with myrtle, and proved as kind to you as Hymen could have made her,
yet, 1 fear, flic could have recompenfed you but by difabufing you, and could not
L 1 2 have
Digitized by Google
26o Seraphic Love.
have freed you from the need of happinefs, but only from a miftake concerning it.
tor, mcthinks, Liitdamor, moft of thcfe tranfitory goods, that we are fo fond of,
may not unfitly be rcfcmbled to the fenfitivc plant, which you have admired at Siongarden
; for as, though we gaze on it with attention and wonder, yet, when we come
to touch it, the coy delufive plant immediately fhrinks in its displayed leaves, and
contracts itfelf into a form and dimenfions, difadvantageoufly differing from the former
; which it again recovers by degrees, when touched no more : fo thefe objects,
that charm us at a diftance, and whilft gazed on with the eyes of expcclatioa and
defire i when a more immediate poflefljon hath put them into our hands, their former
In it re vanifhes, and they appear quite differing things from what before they feemed i
though after deprivation or abfence hath made us forget their emptinefs, and we be
reduced to iook upon them again at a diftance, they recover in moft men's eyes their
former beauty, and are as capable as before to inveigle and delude us. I muft add,
linaamsr, that when 1 compare to the fenfitivc plant moft of thcfe tranfitory things,
that are flattered with the title of goods, I do not out of that number except moft
miflrefles. For, though 1 am no fuch an enemy to matrimony, as fomc (for want of
undcrftanding the raillery, 1 have fometimes ufed in ordinary difcourfe) arepleafed to
think nv, and would not refufe you my advice (though I would not fo readily give
you my example) to turn votary to Hymen ; yet I have obferved fo few happy matches,
and k> many unfortunate ones ; and have fo rarely feen men love their wives at the
rate they did, whilft they were their mifirefles ; that I wonder not, that legiflators
thought it neceflary to make marriages indiflbluble, to make them lafting. And I
cannot fitlier compare marriage than to a lottery ; for in both, he that ventures may
fucceed, and may mifs •, and if he draw a prize, he hath a rich return of his venture:
but in both lotteries there is a pretty ftore of blanks for every prize. Ar.d for your
particular, l.indatnor, the world is much miftaken in both your humours, if Hertnione's
and yours be not fo unfuitable, that (to make hafte from fo nice a fubjeft)
had (he juftified your expectation of her kindnefs, you would have poffefled thepcrfon
without pofleiling the happinefc you expected , and might have found yourfelf as
lenfibly difappointed by her grant, as you were by her change.
But I forget, Lsndamcr, that I refolved not to infift on parallels v and therefore,
inftead of profecuting the difcourle my pen has dipt into, concerning the advantages
of Serapbici, compared with ordinary love, I ftiall venture to encourage you to the
former, by (hewing you, that your paft addictednefs to the latter may prove ferviccable
to you in it. Yes, Lindamor, I fhall not fcruple to tell you, that your pafiion for
Hormone may not a little facilitate your devotion, partly by breaking all the chain;,
excepting one, that fattened your affection to unfatisfying objects, and reftrained it
from foaring to the fublimeft ; and partly, by exalting your paflion to a height fit for
leraphick flames. For love hath this of noble, that it makes us diveft ouriclves of
felfilhnefs, flight fortune, quiet, fafety, honour, life, and all our own concernments,
when their coming into competition with the loved party's intereft, may render their
facrificc acceptable to her \ and make us think goods or ills defcrve thofe names, but
as they come to us from or through her. You could fcarce have learned a better
lefTon, even from a much better mafter •, for love having thus accuflomed you to
(what is thought moft difficult in that virtue) the acts of felf- denial, you need almoft
but transfer your flames from an inferior and miffaken to their true and nobleft object,
and you will have exalted and refined your love into devotion \ to the latter of which
a fublime elevation of the firft is fuch a difpofition, as the having formerly by looffer
airs and (perchance) wanton fongs, learned to improve and to command one's voice,
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 261
is, to the Hull of Tinging thofe devout hymns and heavenly anthems, in which the'
church militant feems ambitious to emulate the triumphant, and eccho back the
folemn praifes and hallelujahs of the celeftial quire. And, as by hunting, though
(poffibly) we follow but fome poor fugitive hare, or fome fuch trifling game, we gain
that vigour, that fufferance, and agility, that fits us for the toils and military hardfnips
that arc exacted in the purfuit of glory, and of empire : fo though in love (devotion's
prenticefhip) the courted creature be often confidcrablc enough to make our elections
fit to be numbered among fuch as thofe that made love be painted blind ; yet in the
progrefs and conduct of our paffion, we contract fuch diGnterefted and refigned habitudes,
as, being preferred to ferve celeftial objects, do excellently qualify us for devotion.
And in effect, a fervent love feems little elle than devotion mifaddreffed, where
our own very cxpreffions may ferve to difabufe us : for, when you give your miftrefs
the ftyle of goddefs, and talk of nothing to her, but offering up of hearts, adoring,
facrifices, martyrdoms docs not all this imply, that though it be faid to her, it is
meant to a divinity : which is fo much the true and genuine objects of men's love,,
that we cannot exalt that paffion for any pther, without inverting it with the notion and
attributes of God ? as children difclofe the inbred kindneis they have for thofe perfons,
by calling the babes they moft doat upon by their dear mother's, or loved nurfe's
names. And as Aaron, and the revolting Jews, by jurtifying to themfclves their it . mil,
adoration of die idols they had fet up, by attributing the title of God to what they
Jj,^^,^.
adored, did tacitly acknowledge adoration to be due only to the Deity ; fo does a !,/B. ("VT
lover, by naming what he worfhips a divinity, tacitly confefs the deity to be the
proper object of that higheft and peculiar (train of worfhip. jLfimi
And this truth, Lindamort the very ficklenefs of lovers concurs to tertify :- for,
what men call, and think inconftancy, is nothing but a chace of perfect beauties, ' V.jehowhich
our love fruidefly follows and leeks in fevcral objects, becaufe he finds it nor^fc
entire in any one. For creatures have but lmall and obicure fragments of it, whichcannot
fix, nor fatisfy an appetite, born for, and (though unwillingly) afpiring unto Gu
God j who is proclaimed the true and proper object of our love, as well by men's 5*** **
ficklenefs to women, and the angel's conltancy to him. Juft as the trembling rcftlefsnefs
of the needle, in any but the north point of the compafs, proceeds from and
manifefts its inclination to the pole ; its paffion for which both its wavering and its
rcrt bear equal witnefs to. That unfatisfiednefs with tranfitory fruitions, that men
deplore as the unhappinefs of their nature, is indeed the privilege of it ; as it is the
prerogative of men not to care for, or be capable of, being pleafcd with whiftles,
hobby-horfes, and fuch fond toys as children doat upon, and make the fole objects
of their defires and joys. And by this you may, Lindamor, in fome degree imagine
the unimagincablc fuavity, that the fixing of one's, love on God is able to blefs the
foul with i fince, by fo indulgent a father, and competent a judge as God himfelf,
the decreed uncontentingnefs of all other goods is thought riclily repaired by its being
but an aptnefs to prove a rife to our love's fettling there.
And hitherto, my deareft Undamer, I have endeavoured to recommend unto you 9.
Strepbick Ltvet by mentioning fome of its properties, which feem to relate more to the
love itfelf, than to the divine object of it. But I fear you'll think I have too long
entertained you- with confiderations, which, befides that they arc not altogether the
importanceft that belong to this difcourfe, I have been by hafte reduced to pen in the
unaccurate order, wherein they offered themfelves to my thoughts, not the method,
wherein I fhould have prefented them to yours.
And
262 Seraphic Love.
*>n- 10. And therefore, IJndamor, fince the nobleft and fupreme motives to the love of God
confift in his own infinite perfections and prerogatives; and fince the properties of
God's love to us do advantage us much more (an:i conlcquendy :u-e likelier to endear
devotion to us) than thole of ours to him j the former not oaiy moving uod to kindle
in us, but to cherifh and foment, and (if our own wilful extinction interpoi'e not) to
crown the latter : for both thefe reafons, I i y, Ltndamor, I doubt not, but you'll
think it feafonable for me to proceed, to conlidcr that higher lort of motives to devotion,
and to evince, that the leveral things, which are wont moft to engage and
heighten our affections, do, in a peculiar and trunl'cendcnt manner, (hine lorth and
conllellate in God. That, you know, which enamoured you of Hermitne, 1 need
not prove to you, to have been your fuppoling her full of lovelincfs and excellencies
in herfelf ; and your believing, that the love fhe vouchsafed you was great, free,
conftant, or advantageous to you. And that all thefe properties do not only eminently
exift, but illuftrioufly concur in God, and his love, I mull now, Lindamcr,
(with ftrong defircs of doing it profperoufly) attempt to manifeft.
s,n. n. First then, our highell love is made God's due by the excellency and prerogative
of his nature. But, trull me, IJndamor, when neceffitatcd (by a method exacted by
the nature of this difcourle) I find myfelf engaged to fay fornething by way of celebration
of God's perfections ; 1 am very fcnlible, I can but detract from what I
defirc to praife, and mull inevitably appear unable to fpeak worthily of a theme, to
which even Seraphim thcmiclves cannot do right. And if, as the fcripture allures us,
thofe things never fell under the fenlcs, nor entered the thoughts of men, which God
» c«r. u. 9. has referved for thofe that love him j how ineffable and incomprchcnfible mull thofe
things be, which he has rderved for himl'clf ? the infinite fuperiority of his nature,
above all created beings, placing a vaft difparity betwixt his greatefl communicated
vouchfafements, and his boundlcfs, and therefore to creatures incommunicable, perfections.
Wonder not therefore, IJndamor; that my weak eyes dare not dwell long upon an
object, which they cannot flcdfaftly gaze on long without being dazzled ; and do not
marvel, that I fcruplc not to ufe feeming hyperboles, in the mention of perfections,
which make the highefl hyperboles but feeming ones •, both God's nature and his word
Neh.ii. j declaring him to be exalted above all bleffing and praife. If it were feafonable, Lindamor,
to entertain ourfclvcs but with thofe attributes of God, which are legible or
confpicuous in the creation •, wc might there difcern the admirable traces of fuch immenfe
power, fuch unfearchable wildom, and fuch exuberant goodnefs, as may juftly
ravifh us to an amazement at them, rather than a bare admiration of them. And I
mult needs acknowledge, IJndamor, that when with bold telefcopes I furvcy the old
and newly difcovcrcd ftars and planets, that adorn the upper region of die world •,
and when with excellent microfcopes I difcern, in otherwife invifible objects, the unimitable
fubtilty of nature's curious workmanfhip •, and when, in a word, by the help
of anatomical knives, and the light of chymical furnaces, 1 fludy the book of nature,
and confult the glofTes of Arijlofle, Epicurus, Paracelfus, Harvey, Helmont, and
other learned expofitors of that inflructive volume : I find myfelf oftentimes reduced
p'«i. cW. to exclaim with the Pfalmift, How manifold are thy works, O Lord ? in wifdom baft
m- tbou made them all7 And when I have been lofing myfelf in admiration of what I
undefined not, but enough to admire, and not to comprehend , I am often obliged
to interrupt or break off my inquiries, by applying to the works of God's creation
Rom.ri. the cxpreffion ufed by St. Paul, of thofe of his providence, O tbe deptb of the riches,
both of tb; wifdom and knowledge of God ! bow unfearchable are bis judgments, and bis
ways
Digitized by GoogltLi
Seraphic Love. 263
ways untraceable ! And exclamations of this nature may the attentive confederation
of any other of God's attributes defcrvcdly produce. But having elfewhere treated
of this fubject in a peculiar difcourfc, I lhall now, Lindamor, invite you to confider
with me, how much you, and thofe that are confcious to their having virtue enough
in themfelves, to make them prize it in others, are in love with Cato, Seifio, and
thofe other heroes, that did ennoble, and almoft exceed mankind, upon the bare
knowledge of their virtues ; although from them we derive no perfonal advantage,
(their death having numerous ages preceded our nativity). Since then we pay fo
much difinterefted love to fome few faint and ill-refined virtues, that never did profit
us •, how much on fuch a fcore, and at that rate, mould we love him, who fo poflefles
all perfections, that each of his perfections is infinite ? Were you and I our own
creators, Lindamor, and wholly independent upon God, without either need or hope
to tafte his bounty ; his native excellencies, and what he has done for others,
fhould furely ravifh us, and enamour us of him. Though his benefits to us did not
entitle him to our love, his effence (the fourcc and only motive of thofe benefits)
would give him a right to it v and though we owed him nought for what we are, we
yet mould owe him love for what he is. He is that glorious fun, from whom (as
beams) all created perfections flow, and in whom they all concenter. To omit God's
fovercign majefty (which places him fo high, that but to own for him fo familiar and
levelling an affection as love, much more to expect: to be re-loved by him, were not
the leaft faucy prefumption man could be guilty of, did not his own commands make
it a duty) not to infill on this, 1 fay, let us a while confider that proper and peculiar
attraction of love, his lovelincfs ; which is fuch, that, did we but once fee it, all
creature-competitions (even we being judges) would then be as impoflible as they are
now unjuft. In the fifth Evangeliu's prophetic vifions, the Seraphim themfelves
,&>tI ^
(thofe glorious ornaments of the celeftial hierarchy) arc reprcfentcd as covering their
faces in God's prefence, either blufhing at their comparative deformity, or unable to
fuftain the unqualified fplerdor of fo divine brightnefs ; whence perhaps it became of
old the Jewilh fafhion (as fome frequent expreflions in their writers intimate) when
they went to pray, to veil their heads and faces ( though now I have in their fynagogues
feen them cover their heads, not their faces, with thofe white garments they
wear at their public devotions). And, Lindamor, if Mofes's face, by but a few days
converfe with God, reflected fuch a light as dazzled mortal eyes ; and if his fwitt
pofts, the angels, when fent on errands to us here on earth, even when they may be
fuppofed (if I may fo fpeak) to wear their travelling clothes, and ftood as much to
our frailty in the form, as the region, they appear to us in, do, in fpitc of that darkening
condefcenfion, fomuch tranfeend all objects hereon earth, that the fcripture
often mentions, that even thofe, that afpired to imitate their virtues, were confounded
at their prefence : and if, in this veiling habit, they appear fo glorious, that their
thus difadvantaged beauty is made the compliment and hyperbole of that quality
;
what may we, or rather, what may we not conclude of God himlclf, of whom the
fcripture fays, He that planted the ear, jball be not bear ? be that formed the eye, jbail
be not fee ? That is, he, that imparts a faculty, or an excellence to the creature,
9.
'
*C1"*
fhall not he himfelf much more eminently pofiefs it? And in effect, the mod unblemifhed
created beauties are but faint ihadows (or trulicr, foils) of his. Thofe
drops of prcttinefs, fcatteringly fprinkled amongft the creatures, were defigned todefecate
and exalt our conceptions, not to inveigle or detain our paflions : for God
did never intend them to terminate our love, but only by our eyes to exalt our faith,
above them, and by the beauties our fight can apprehend to raiic us to a confidence,
that
Digitized by Google
264 Seraphic Love.
* Kim ii. that there is in their author more than we can cither fee or comprehend. Like E&*
jab's fiery chariots, though they be pure and bright, and confift of the nobleft and
M-JJ.
glorioufeft materials, they are meant by God but to carry us up to him. And as the
patriarch's fteward was furnifhed with fo fumptuous an equipage to court Rebecca,
not for himfclf, but for Ifaac ; fo all the lovclinefs imparted to the creature is lent it,
but to give us fome more enlarged conceptions of that vail confluence and immenfity,
that exuberates in God. To make the nghteft ufc of fading beauties, you mull confider
God and them, as you were wont to do your miftrefs's picture and its cryftal
cover : where, though that native glafs were pure and lovely, and very richly edged,
yet to gaze on it was not the chiefeft bufinefs of your eye •, nor did you in it terminate
your light, but greedily look through and beyond it, upon the adored image, that
folid veil betrayed. Mcthinks, Seraphic and our common lovers behold exterior
beauties with a difference refembling that, wherewith children and aftronomers confuler
Galileo's optic glafles (with one of which tclclcopes, that I remember I faw at
Florence, he merrily boafted, that he had t ovato la corte a Giove-,) which the one
prizes mod for what they appear ; the other, ior what they dilcovcr. For children
contenting themfclves to wonder at the length, and fall in love with the workmanfliip
and gildings of the tube, do thus but gaze upon them; wher as aftronomers look
through them, and, fcarce taking notice of the unufual orna .icnts, or the fhape,
employ them to find out unknown lights in the Iky, and to dcf:r/ in heaven bright
ftars, unfeen before, and other ecleftial novelties and beauties.
s»a. 1*. I oenv not, Lindamor, that God has been pleafcd to adorn fome of his creatures
with hints an i imprelles, as well of his lovehnels as his other excellences ; but they
do much more faintly and imperfectly refemble him, than the counterfeit fun wc
fomctimes fee in a cloud emulates the true one, by whole refracted and reflected
beams, fome acute modern naturalifts fuppofe it to be produced. For though this
derivative fun Ihine with a not-inconfidzrable luftre, comparatively to the reft of the
dark cloud it ennobles -, yet is it not only as much inferior to the true fun in brightnefs,
as in height, but it enjoys alone a precarious, dependent, and almoft momentary
being, which often it lofes in a very Inort time, and never attains to preferve a very
long one. And therefore, to neglect that fupreme refplendency, that fhines in God,
for thofe dim representations of it, that we fo doat on in the creature, is as prcpoftcrous
and abfurd, as it were for a Pcrfian to offer his facrifice to a parhelion (as the
Greeks call that meteor) inftead of adoring the fun. And certainly, Lindamer, if
» Kiapri. 0ur ^m u8nt» ''kc tnat °f tnc prophet's fervant, who faw the mountains near Detban
17.
' covered with horfes and chariots of fire, were privileged to difcern otherwife inviflble
objects -, our raviflied eyes would behold lovelincfs enough in God, to make us in-
Zfth. iz. ceflantly exclaim in the language of the prophet, How great is bis goodnefs, and bow
*i' great is bis beauty I Agreeably whereunto we may oblerve, that as the loadftone doth
attract moft powerfully the brighteft needles, made of the pureft ftcel, and thofe that
mod approach it ; fo angels, who, of all created beings, enjoy the unclouded'ft light,
and the moft clear knowledge of their Maker, do love him with a conftancy fo fixed,
that in five thoufand and fome odd centuries of years (efHuxed fince the creation)
they could never fee any thing, either in God, or out of him, capable to feduce them
to a change 5 God's lovelineft (which is fucb, that the eternal fruition of himfelf
creates even his felicity) is like rare mufic, which, though it do delight all its partakers,
the knowingeft artifts ftill do highlieft value, and are moft ravifticd with the
tranfports it produceth, being proportioned to the degrees of the flcilfulnefs of its
admirers. The apoftate fpirits indeed defcrted their firft ftation, not frighted thence
by
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 265
by any blemifh they defcried in God ; but probably fell by a faucy affectation of a
parity ; and (as divines tell us) a facrilegious afpiring to perfections, which they were
criminally unable to behold, without wifhing them their own. And for their prefent
fcparation from God, it is their curie and puni/hment. And I fhall ingenuoufly confefs
to you, Lindamor, that by the advantageous ideas I entertained of God's perfections,
I have been fometimes inclined to think, that the reafon why God tells Mofes,
Thou canft not fee myface, for therefhall no manfee me and live, might be, that as tranf- imt.
cendent objects deftroy the fcnfe, fo lovely and glorious a fight (whofe continuance *••
fhall make our happinefs in heaven) would let in joys, and would create defires, too
mighty for frail mortality to fuftain. The ravifhed foul being Ihcwn fuch game as
that, would hate fo eagerly, that flic would break thofe leafhes, that tie her to the
body (and thereby hinder her flight to that wifhed union) ; and the glad heart (too
narrow a receptacle for fo much joy) to make room for fuch guefts, would ftretch
unco a rupture. Longing or joy have fometimes fingly reached degrees, that have
made them fatal •, and why then mould their union, in fuch extremes, be thought uncapable
of producing the like effect ? Nor is it, perchance, more a privilege of
the next life, that we lhall then fee God, than that we (hall furvive that glorious
light ; which is too dazzling an object for mortal eyes, till (to ufe St. Paul's exprcf- 1 c,r- *rfion)
our mortal fhall have put on immortality. But I muft no longer lofe myfelf in a
**"
theme, on which it is fo eafy to fpeak much, and fo impoflibleto fay enough. If I
be not very much miftaken, they are fo, who prefume to give us fatisfactory definitions
of God*s nature, which wc may perhaps more fafely define by the impoflibility
of its being accurately defined. And 1 muft confefs, I do the leaft expect the
beft defcription of the divine nature from thofe, that are moft forward to take upon
them to explicate it j for our words being but the rcprefentations of our notions, and
they being neceflarily finite, as our being; few men are (mcthinks) more likely to
be miftaken in the nature of what is infinite (and confequently of God's attributes)
than thofe that think defcriptions can comprize it. Nor will an affiduity and conftancy
of our fpeculations herein relieve us •, for too fixed a contemplation of God's
cfience does but the more confound us. As I remember St. Paul tells the Jews, that
he could not fee for the glory, or that light, that Ihone from heaven about him at his
converfion. And this the famous Simonides experimentally found, who being afked ' u
what God was, took a day's time to confider of it •, after being called upon for his
anfwer, he dcfired two days longer to think upon it ; and, when they were expired,
demanded four days longer and fo continued a great while, each time increafing
his demands for refpite, till, being preft to give an account of fuch a dilatory way of
proceeding, he ingenuoufly acknowledged, that the longer he confidercd God's nature,
the lefs he comprehended it. And indeed, experience teaches us, that they,
that gaze ftedfaftlieft on the noon-day's fun, can leaft of all difcern what it is, being
rather dazzled than inftrufled by fo confounding an object. Nor, is it only, Lindamcr,
a tafk of too great difficulty for a mere man, perfectly to explicate that incomprehenfible
nature of God, to which nothing but his own infinite underftanding can
be adequate •, but, methinks, even to celebrate God's perfections, cannot be foberly
attempted, without a very deep fcnfe of a man's own unworthinefs and incapacity.
For, the fame excellencies, that furnifh us with praifes, do tranfce:;d them. And the
fruitfulnefs of the fubject may as well deter, as invite our pens ; fince, as wc are fure
we fhall not want theme, fo we are certain we cannot dignify it And for my part,
Lmdatnor, though my fubject exacled of me the praifes I have endeavoured to afcribe
to God, yet 1 fhould have thought it rather to decline the laws of method, than be
Vol. 1. M m reduced
Digitized by GooglW*
266 Seraphic Love.
reduced to derogate from what I would extol ; if the neceiTiry of detracting from
God's perfections were not equal to that of mentioning them , and if that neceflity
were not as glorious to God, as greater praifes than we are able to afcribe him, could
be. Bur, Lindamtr, having thus done right to my method, though I could not to
my theme, I (hall only invite you to imitate with me thofe Perfians, that adored the
fun, thought the light he lent them ferved but to make the fource of it admired, and
not to pry into his abftrufe enence with it. And though I might fay much more concerning
God's perfections, I muft henceforth think ulence the propereft language I
can now employ •, for it is filence, that beft expreffes our wonder : and fure, wonder
is never more ieafonable than when God is the object \ a proftrate veneration being
the fafeft apprehenfion of him, that is incomprehenfible.
t* tj. Having thus confidered, Undamor, how fit an object God is of our higheft love
for what he is in himlclf ; let us now proceed to derive further proofs of the fame
truth from what he is to us (that your gratitude may contend with your reafon, which
fliall mod heighten your devotion) and we (hall find in the vaftneis, freendb, difintereftednefc,
conftancy, and advantageoufnefs of his love to us, that more than all the
love we can pay him were but a little part of that wc owe him.
But for the firft attribute, we have alligned his love (the greatnefs of it) it being a
general property, diffufed through all the reft, and confpicuous in them, it requires
now to be treated of apart.
We fhall then proceed to the freenefs or unmeritednefs of God's love ; to believe
which ftrangely vaft, we need but confider, that we fo little could at firft deferve his
love, that he loved us even before we had a being ; and our felicity in his decrees
preceded our exiftence in this world. God loved you numerous ages before you
were ; and his goodnefs is fo entirely its own motive, that even your creation (fince
when, alone you can pretend to merit his love) is the effect of it. This benefit alone
were fufficient to render God the object of our love, though we were that of his.
averfion. For (as the PcrQans adored the fun even when it icorched them) we efteem
ourfelves obliged to love and honour our parents, in fpight of their being wicked and
Unkind, though they be but God's inftruments in our production, and made us what
we were born, not arbitrarily, but in virtue of his ordination. But God, to confer
on us, in the moft excellent and endearing manner, the blcfling promifed to his antut.
»i». 4. cjcnt people, when he vouchfafed to aflurc them, that be would love them /reefy', was
pleafed to love us, not only when we were not at all, but when we were his enemies
;
a<».*. m. If when we were enemies (faith St. Paul) we were reconciled to Cod by the dealt of bis
Son, &c. Our inexiftence indeed was a condition, wherein nothing in us was capable
of being a motive of God's love : but our enmity proceeded farther, and made us
worthy of his deteftation ; as if his love were nothing unlefs it vanquished obftacles,
Re». » 4. as well as wanted motives. This gave the Apoftle a juft caufe to fay, that God commendeth
bis love towards us, in (bat while we wereyet finners Cbrifi diedfor us : that is,
when we wanted all motives to invite his love, unlefs our very want of them Ihould
j*B.ia. pals for one. And how did God exprefs his love unto us ? even by the gift of the
»*• Son of his love ; For Gcdfo loved the world; (fays the divine token of his love) that
rbii. ».*, be gave bis only begotten Son. And how did that Son love it? He (fays the Apoftle)
l> *• being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God ; but made bimfelf
of no refutation, and took upon him the form of a fervant, and was made in the likentfs
of men. And being found in fafbion as a man, be bumbled bimjelf and became obedient
ttnto death, even the death of the crofs. That is, that lie would love at no lefs rate
than death ; and, from the fupereminent height of glory, ftooped and abafed himlclf
Digitized by Google
Strapbic Love. 267
fclf to the fuffcrance of theextremcft of indignities, and funk himfelf to the bottom
of abjeclednefs, to exalt our condition to the contrary extreme. He was wounded*1^1 s«
for our tranfgreffions, be was bruifed for our iniquities, the cbaftifement of our peace was
upon bim, and with bisfiripes we are healed., fays the Prophet. For ye know tbe grace * viii.
tf our Lord Jefus Chrift, that tbougb be was rich, yet for your fakes be becamepoor, that
9 '
ye through bis poverty might be made rich, fays the Apoftle. Men having difpleafed
God, and consequently forfeited all right and natural poflibility to happinefs , even
whilft they compleatea the forlornnefs of their condition, by the lethargy of not being
fenfible of it, and were as carclefs to feek means of recovery, as they had been unable
tc*devife them of themfelvcs •, even then, his reftlefs love would never be at quiet,
till it had fet his omnifcience on work, to contrive expedients, and find out a way to
reconcile hisjuftice and his mercy, in reconciling finncrs to himfelf. And this merciful
defign, by the incarnation of his Son, he profecuted in a way fo worthy of hinv
fclf, and fo advantageous to us, that our juft wonder at it may keep us from having
any, to find that, as St. Peter informs us, the very angels (prompted, queilionlcfs,
by a religious curiofity) ardently defire to look into thole divine myfteries. I find it 1 ' "•
hody difputed amongft divines (not only betwixt the Socinians and the Orthodox,
but betwixt Orthodox and Orthodox) whether or no God could, without violating his
juftice, havedevifed any other courfe for the expiation of fin, than the paffion and
death of Chrift. But, without venturing to determine, whether or no God could,
to redeem us, have chofen any other way ; we may fafely think, that he has chofen
the moil obliging and moft endearing way \ difplaying in this divine manner of refcuing
us the fevereft juftice, and the nigheft mercy i the greateft hatred of fin, and
the greateft love to Sinners ; fince by thofe unequalled and unvaluable fufFerings, to
which he delivered up, for us, that Son, who is near unto him, that he truly faid,
/ and tbe Father are one, he at once manifefted, both how much he hated fin, which J*** «• 3°-
he fo heavily punifhed in the perfon he moft loved (though that furety but adopted
it, to free men from the infupportable vengeance of it) and how much he loved
finners, by giving up what he fo loved, for a ranfom of thofe that were guilty of
what he fo hated. And therefore our Saviour, though he did fuch great things to
fatisfy the unbelieving and contumacious jews of his being their promifed Mefliah,
would not decline death to convince them and, though he had not feldom done fo
much to make himfelf the object of their faith, would not be invited from the crofs,
though the chief pricfts and fcribes themfelvcs faid at his crucifixion, Let bim new MMt-
come downfrom tbe crofs, and we will believe on bim. And Chrift, to convince the 7"
world of their unablenefs to emerge and recover out of that deep abyfs, wherein the
load of fin (which, in fcripturc, is called a weight) had precipitated fallen man, iu, »«. u
came not into the world, until well nigh 4000 years of ficknefs had made the difeafe
defperate, and the cure almoft hopelefs. So inveterate an obftinacy at once widening
the diftance betwixt God and man, and proclaiming the latter's difability to find, by
his own wifdom, expedients of reunion. Thus Chrift healed and difpofibfied a dumb un. u. 1*.
perfon, who was able to make intreaties but by the difability of pronouncing them
and might truly fay to the fecure world, / am found of them, that fought me not. And iw. u». ».
when our Saviour was come into the wretched world, of all the numerous miracles
recorded in the gofpel, he fcarce did any for his own private relief. And to ftiew,
that as he endured his forrows for our fakes, that by bis firipes we nu'gbt be healed ; icuai. s,
fo were the joys he tailed in relation to us. We read not (which is highly obfervable)
in the whole gofpel, that ever he rejoiced but once •, and that was, when his returned
difciplcs informed him, that they had vicloiioufly chafed devils and diftafes out of Uktx M m 2 oppreffed
a68 Seraphic Love,
epprejfed mortals* and that by his authority men had been difpojfejfed of both the temper
and punifhment of fin. He converted among his contemporaries with virtues, as
well attefting what he was, as prophecies and miracles could do ; and to teach man,
how much he valued him above thofe creatures, that man makes his idols, he often
altered and fufpended the courfe of nature for man's inflruction, or his relief, and
Mit. reverted the laws cftablifhed in the univerfe, to engage men to obey thofe of God, by
doing miracles fo numerous and great, that the Jews unbelief may be almoft counted
Mit.iii. i». one. Yet were thofe wonders wrought for a generation, that afcribed them to the
devil, and returned them with fo uncxemplified an ingratitude, that it is not the
lcaft of his wonders, that he would vouchlafe to work, any of them for fuch blafpffcmous
wretches •, who were indeed, as fome of the later Jews have too truly ftyled
thcmfelvcs, in relation to their fathers, Cbometz ben yayin, vinegar the child of wine,
a moll degenerate offspring of holy progenitors. He luffered fo much for them, that
made him do lb, that he luffered the addition of mifery of being thought to fufier dcifci.
uii.n fervcdly, And be was numbred with the tranfgreffors. And though he lived as much
a miracle as any he did, yet did his condition fometimes appear fo defpicable and forlorn,
that men could not know his deity but by his goodnefs, which was too infinite
not to belong incommunicably to God. And though it were once a faying of our
jobn »». Saviour's, Greater love batb no man than this, that a man lay down bis life for bis friends ;
** yet is not what is faid of the love here mentioned, to be underftoodof love indefinitely,
or generally confidered, but only of the fingle ads or exprcflions of a man's
love to his friends compared betwixt themfelves. And fo the alleged paflagc fecms
to mean but this, that among the fingle afts of kindnefs to a man's friends, there is
not any one more highly expreflive of a real and fincere love, than to part with one's
life for their fakes. This text therefore would not be indefinitely applied to the
affection of love itfclf, as if it could not poflibly be greater than is rcquifite to make
a man content or willing to die for his friends ; for he, that facrifices, befides his life,
his fortune alio, his children, and his .reputation, does thereby cxprefs more love to
them, than he could do by parting with his life only for them. .And he that is forward
to die for thofe, that hate him, or, at lcaft, know him not, dilc'ofes a more
plentiful and exuberant flock of love, than he that does the fame kindnefs but for
thofe that love him. And thus our Saviour would be underftood, unlefs we would
fay, that he out-praclifed what he taught •, for, he came to lay down his life even for
his enemies, and (like the kind balfam tree, whofe healing wounds weep fovereign
balm to cure thofe that made them) he rcfufed not to die for thole that killed him,
and fhed his blood for fome of thofe that fpilt it. And fo little was his injured love
to the ungrateful world difcouraged or impaired by the lavage entertainment he met
with in it, that, after he had fuffcred from wretched men (for whofe fakes he left
heaven to become capable of fuffering) fuch barbarous indignities, as might have
made bare punifhmcnts appear mercy, and even cruelty itfelf feem no more than
juflice i when, I fay, to hope for fo much as his pardon were prcfumption, he was
pleafed to create confidence of no lefs than his love, a virtue. Nor think it, Lindamor
, impertinent to our prefent theme, that I infill fo much on what Chrift has
j^n i. jo. done and luffered for us, fince both he himfclf informs us, that be and bis Father are
y&tf
1 mt » a°d fome of the texts already mentioned have taught us, that it was an eflcA of
God's love alfo to the world, that be gave bis only begotten Son to redeem it -, and, that
fcbJiVIi. God tommendetb bis love towards */, in that while we were yet ftnners Chrift diedfor us.
**»•»•»• Wherefore I lhall, without fcruple, proceed toobferve to you, that fofrcc is Chrift's
dileclion, that the grand condition of our felicity is our bdicf, that he is difpofed to
make
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 269
make us happy, on terms, not only fo honourable to him, but to advantageous- to us,
that, I was about to fay, that pollibly faith itfelf would fcarce be exacted as rcquifite
to our happincfs, but that the condition does increafe the benefit, by vouchlafing
us bold and early anticipations of it : for, faith being (as the Apoftle terms it) the
HA' K
fubjiance of things hoped for, and evidence (or conviction) of things not feeny wafts our
joys to this fide of die grave, bows heaven down to us, till our freed fpirits can foar
up to heaven •, and docs us fuch a fervice, as the Jewifii fpies did to their countrymen,
by bringing them over to this fidi Jordan into the wildernefs, fome of the plea- Numb,
fantand delicious fruits of the bleflcd Land of Promife. I faid, Lindamor, that
faith was the grand condition required in God's free grant of eternal life. Not that I
would afcribe any thing to a lazy, ipeculative, and barren faith, in oppofition to that
lively and active one, which is called by the Apoftle, Wr »« )l dy*mt ivtpytipm, faith c,t- » *>
operating by love ; fince I am informed by St. James, that the divorce of faith and j»«n. «. »«.
works is as deftructive to religion, as that of foul and body is to life : but that I
was willing to mind you, that though true faith (which cries like Rachel,, give mechiU Ceo.
dren orelfe I die) be ever the pregnant mother of good works, yet are not thofe works
the caufe, but the effects and figns of God's firft love to men (however afterward the
children may nurfe their parents.) As, though the needle's pointing at the poles be,
by being an effect, an argument of its having been invigorated by the loadilone, or
received influence from Tome other magnetic body ; yet is not that refpect unto t!>e
north the caufe, but the operation of the iron's being drawn by the attractive mineral,
thou art gooa\ and dojt good% fays the Pfalmift to his Maker. The greatnefs of his^*1 ' 00*"
goodnefs is that, which makes it ours ; nor doth he do us good, becaufe that we are
good, but becaufe he is liberally fo ; as the fun (bines on dunghills, not out of any
invitation his beams find there, but becaufe it is his nature to be diffufive of his
light ; yet with this difference, that whereas the fun's bounty, by being rather an
advantage to us than a favour, defcrves our joy, and not cur thanks ; becaufe his
vifits arc made defignlcfsly, and without any particular intention of addrefs (by fuch
a bare neceflity of nature, as that which makes fprings flow out into ftreams, when
their beds are tco narrow to contain the renewed water that doth inceflantly fwell the
exuberant fources ,) God, on the contrary, for being ncccflarily kind, is not Ids
freely or obligingly fo, to you, cr me. For, though fome kind of communicativenefs
be eflcntial to his goodnefs, yet his extenfion of it without himfelf, and his
vouchfafing it to this or that particular perlbn, are purely arbitrary. To omit his.
love to the numberlefs elect angels ; the llrict relations betwixt the perfons of the
bleflcd Trinity, fupplying God with internal objects, which employed his kindnefs
before the creation, and himfelf being able to allow his goodnefs the extent of infinity
for its diffufion. But (having glanced at this only by the by) we may yet further
admiringly obferve, that whereas men ufually give freelieft where they have not
given before, and make it both the motive and excufe of their deliftancc from giving
any more, that they have given already ; God's bounty hath a very different methoil
for he ufes to give, becaufe he hath given, and that lie may give. Confonantly to
which, when the revolting Ifraclitcs had broken the contents, whillt Mofes was bringing
them the tables of the Law, and had thereby provoked the incenfed giver of it
to the thoughts of a hidden extirpation of fo ingratcful and rebellious a people ; we
may obferve, that, whereas God, as unwilling to remember his former goodnefs to
them, fpcaking to M-fcs, calls them, 'Thy people which then brought?]} cut if the land*"*-
cf Egypt : Alojes, on the other fide, to engage God to the new mercy of a pardon,.
1" '' r*
rcprclcnts to God his former mercy to them, and calls them Ccd's peopL\ which he r,,/,
brcr.gbi
370 Seraphic Love,
brought forth out of the land of Egypt, with great power\ and with a mighty hand.
Ana lb confpicuous in the eternal Son was this property of the merciful Father, that
when fick Lazarus'& fitters implored his refcue tor their expiring brother, the motive
johnii. j. tnCy empk)ycd, and which profpered their addrefles, was, Lord, behold (not, he who
loveth thee, but) be whom thou loveft is fick. And as he takes the firit inducements
of his bounty from himfelf •, fo do his former favours both invite and give rates to
his iucceeding bleflings. And there is realbn for it i for his pure love being all the
merit, by which man can pretend to the effeds of his bounty, it is but juft, that the
degree of his love ttiould proportion thole favours, which it is our only title to ; and
that God's liberality ttiould as well afford meafures as motives to iticlf.
s<n. 14. Nor is God's love lefs difinterefted than free. His grand defign upon us is but to
make us inttruments and partakers of his glory, and to bring us to everlafting happinefs,
by a way, that docs as well elevate and dignify our nature, as the condition
refcrved for us will. His method of faving us, if but complied with, does here, as
°c»i. 1.11. the Apottle fpeaks, fit us for the inheritance of the Saints in light -, we being made (as
«i'eU. 4. cjc peJcr fpeaks) partakers of the divine nature, having efcaped the corruption that is in
the world through luft. So that thofe things, wherein the noblett of the philolbphcrs
placed their felicity, ferve but to qualify and prepare Chrittians for that higher bleflednefs,
that is referved by God for thofe that love him and cannot but be heightened
and endeared by the value, which graces and virtues had given men on earth, lor fuch
a noble and rational kind of happinefs, as is apportioned to them in heaven. What
ends can he have upon us, whofe goodnefs and his blefTednefs are both infinite ? He
was inconceivably happy (in his own felf-fufficiency) before the creatures had a being
and fure that felicity, that needed not themfclvcs to be fupreme, needs nothing that
they can do *. Nor was it his indigence, that forced him to make the world, thereby
to make new acquifitions , but his goodnefs, that prefied him to manifett, and to impart
his glory, and the goods, which he fo overflowingly abounds with. Witnefs
his fufpenfion of the world's creation, which certainly had had an earlier date, were
the Deity capable of want, and the creatures of fupplying it. St. Paul, inhisepiftle
iTrm.i.ti. to Timothy, ityles God M«xa'p ,®'» which we t ran Hate she bleffed God, but may, per-
• Tim. «L
},apS) more properly be rendered the happy God : and elfewhere, in the fame epiftlc,
a(u he truly calls him the happy, as well as only potentate. God (fays the Apottle) thai
*** *5'
*6
' made the world, and all things therein, feeing that he is Lord of heaven and earthy
dwelletb not, &c. As though he needed any thing, feeing that he giveth to all life, and
breath, and all things. And, in him we live, and move, and have our being. And
indeed fo coherent in the mind of a meer man, that does but confidcr and underftand
the import of his own notions, is the belief of God's happinefs to that of his
being, that I remember the Epicurean, Lucretius himfelf, even in that impious paffage,
where he denies divine providence, and in a fecming, but injurious complement,
would, under the pretence of eafing God of it, deprive him of the government
of the world, does yet confefe, that the divine nature mutt neccflarily enjoy a
supreme and cndlefs tranquillity j adding (to bring this to our prefent purpofe) that it is
•Privata dolore ornni, privata periclis,
Ipfa fuis pollens cpibus, nihil indiga nojlri.
* Quid tnim immtrtalitut aljm hath,
Gratia Wtjbm jutat largiri, r tmtluminti,
Ut mtfire ptiHg—m tau/J gtrtrt aggrtdtrtutur t Lucrct. ex Epic.
Whereby-
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 271:
Whereby he acknowledges,
fir turn.
'
. ill. I*.
• That from all griefs and dangers of them freed
« Rich in itfelf, it has of us no need.
Or, if you will have him fpeakof the gods in the plural, like a heathen poet, that
6 Far above griefs and dangers, thofe bleft powers,
* Rich in their native goods, need none of ours.
A much nobler poet tells us, that the earth it the Lord's, and the fulnefs thereof", Pf»l. air.
the world* and they that dwell therein. Agreeably whereunto, that great God, that m.
formed all things (as in our tran flat ion the fcripture calls him) fays in one of the Pfalms, i0. g I were hungry, 1 would not tell thee, for the world is mine, and the fulnefs thereof MALM*
is ubiquity excludes all wifhes of remove, by making his cflence incapable of exclufion
. for, whither fhould he defire to tranfport himfelf, that is every where, and
can wiili himfelf in no place, where he is not already ? His fumciency is fuch, that
he can fee no goods, but what he gives or hath (or rather both beftows and pofleffes)
his plenty being fo unexhaufted a fpring of goods, that his liberality does lefs impoverifh
God, than the fun's light does him, or imparted knowlege impairs the
teacher's flock. And therefore, though St. James does very Juftly call God the fa- J"**-
ther of lights, who is the beftower of every good and every perfect gift ; yet the friend f«m. IL »i»
*/ God (as the fcripture calls Abraham) and that royal pneft (whom the writer to thej£b
;
TO
Hebrews teaches us to have been fo illuftrious a type of him, whom he calls the high Het>
prieft of our profeffion) do both of them, in the fame chapter, ftyle him, The pojfefor
of heaven and earth. No, no, God needs not beg from, nor covet in the creatures
(hallow ftreams, thofe goods, of which he not only hath, but is the fourcc. Our
greateft ferviccs to our Creator muft be to difcharge ourfclves, not to*advantage him,
nor as thinking to add any thing to a felicity, which were not infinite, could it admit
increafe. Our higheft performances, though they be dues, amount not unto tributes,
but are rather like thofe pepper-corns of rent, which freeholders pay, not
with hope or with intent to enrich their landlord, but to acknowledge, that they hold
all from him. When we admire the fun, our feeing of his light doth not increafe
it i it makes it not greater, but only makes it ours ; and when we turn away, or ftuit
our eyes, that glorious planet fuffers no eclipfe, and is not at all darkened or impaired,
nor doth he thereby lofe his light, but we : the eafinefs of the application
requires, and excufes its omiflion. If thou Jinntjl (fays Elihu in Job) what doft thou j<*„„.
againjl him ? if thou be righteous, what giveft thou him ? or what reeervetb he of thine ** i> >
hand ? thy wickednefs may hurt a man, as thou art, and thy righteoufnefs may profit the
fan of man. In effect, the wicked's fpite againft God is but like a madman's running
his head againft the wall, that leaves the wall unfhaken, but dafhes his own brains
out. God inhabits a felicity (as well as light) inaccefliblc to all inferiour attempts : iTim. ru
his fovcreign tranquillity is fo fublimcly placed, that it is above the reach of all dif-
,6"
quieting impreflions ; and, like the ftars, that feel not the difeafes their inaufpicious
influence produces, he doth not refent the torments he inflicts. God's jufticc is not
lefs eflcntial to him than his mercy •, witnefs that (the numbers of the faints and the
irprobate confidered) thoufands fall facrifices to the feverer attribute, for one that
proves capable of the milder. He faid, He would get himfelf honour upon Pharaoh »>*
end all bis bojt, when he defigned their ruin in the Red Sea : and Mofes laid, he hath b*, aT,a,
3 triumphed
17 2 Seraphic Love.
triumphed glorioufly in effecting it. And in Ezekiel he fays, Behold 1 am againft the/,
t«k. O Sidon, and I will be glorified in the midft of tbee, and they jhail know, that I am the
Lord, when 1Jball have executed myjudgments in her; andjhali'befanSifitd in her. Thus,
when a flafti of God's indignation (kindled by that ftrange fire they prcfumed to offer
i*vitx. 3 . before him) had blaftcd the two prefumptuous fons of Aaron, God is faid to have been
fantlified in tbem that come nigh him, and to have been glorified before all the people ; fuch
eminent and exemplary inftanccs of feverity manifefting him to be fo holy in his laws,
and lb concerned lor diem, that even the minifters of his altars fhall not violate them
Hcb.iii. wich impunity, but find him (what the writer to the Hebrews calls him) a confuming
fire -, who will be glorified before all his people, either by the obedience of thole
that approach him, or by their dcftru&ion. So to evidence, that God can derive
fatisfaction as well from the excrcife of provoked juftice, as from that of his provoked
mercy, the facred orator • ufes this, remarkable antanaclafis : And it Jball come to pafs,
3 ' that as the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, and multiply you ; fo will the Lord rejoice
overyou to dejlroy you, and bring you to naught. Thus, though it be truly faid of
L»m. i«. God by the prophet Jeremiah, that he doth not ajjli£l willingly, nor grieve the children
•* of men (and therefore the determined ronfumption of the whole land, which our
ift. bibles englilh, God's work is ftrange work, other tranflators read, Opus alienum fuum ):
yet when the fins of incorrigible offenders are grown to that provoking height, that
his mercy intercedes no more to avert or fufpend the inflictions of his juftice, than
how much he can fatisfy himfelf in deftroying thofe, that would not be preferved,
may be guefied at by that formidable expreflion in Ezekiel; where, having foretold
what havock the fword, die famine, and the peftilence lhould make amongft the in-
E«A.xui. tradable and difperfed Iiraelites, he adds (as a kind of 'Ewmnm) thus Jball mine anger
5- be accomplijhed, and 1 will caufe my fury to reft upon them, and I will be comforted. The
howlings of the damned as well found forth his praifes, as do the hallelujahs of the
taints •, they both do fing to him an cverlafting canticle of praife : only in this great
concert of his whole intelligent creation, the defignlcfsly confpiring voices are as differing
as the conditions of the refpective fingers. Hell's d..rknefs doth as well contribute
to God's glory, as heaven's eternal fplendor; as lhadows, judicioufly placed,
do no lefs praife the painter, than do the livelier and brighter colours. And as when
the earth doth fend black, noifome, and fulphurcous exhalations up toward the fky,
aJas, they reach not heaven, nor difcompofe the fpheres , but all ths ftorms and thunders
they produce fall on that globe they came from, and there do all their mifchicf
fo, the wicked may wrong God indeed, yet do they really harm but themfelves by all
their greateft fins, which trouble him chiefly, but becaufe they ncceflltate him to
puniln them ; for the tranlgreflions, that do molt provoke God, do him not the leaft
harm. An impious perfon may (as Elibu lately informed us) hurt a man as himfelf
is, not that lupremely blefied Deity •, the rel'ult of whofc infinite perfections is a
refembling happinels, which is as infeparablc from him as his effencc. Our offences
may derogate trom his acceflional glory, not from his effential felicity •, or rather,
the moll defperate finners, by their greateft crimes, can but change the attribute they
lhould bring honour to, and but oppofe the glorifying of his goodnefs to occafion
the glorifying of his juftice; fincc he will be infallibly glorified, foon or late, either
by men's actions, or their fuffcrings ; by their practice of duties, or punifhment for
fin. Thus you fee, how little God is beholden to you for your declining hell ; nor
will the fcore be very much encreafed by your addrcfles and attempts for heaven.
Jok. nfl, Can a man (fays Eliphaz) be profitable unto God, as be that is wife may be profitable unto
*'* b'mfdf? Is it any pleafure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous ? or is it gain unio
Lim,
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 273
him, that tbou makejt thy ways perfe8 f Congruoufly to which fenfc the Pfalmift fays, * »•
my goodnefs extendetb not to thee. The fire, that we kindle on God's altars, heats and
enlightens us, but warms not heaven at fo diftant a remove, nor is wanted in the
fun's refidence. We have all the redolence of the perfumes and incenfe we burn upon
his altars the fmoke doth vanifh ere it can reach the iky, and whilft it is undifperied,
but clouds and but obfcures it. Alas, our beft performances are as ufelefs fcrvices
to God, as the heir's bringing wax to his departing father is to him which adds not
any thing to the rich man's ftore, and is by him deftred and accepted, only to feal
away a fortune to his fon. Though therefore it be true, that God is pleafcd with our
pertbrmances, yet is that welcome he vouchfafes to give them fo far from enabling
us by them to requite his love, that it increafes the unrequitednefs of it ; fince he
is delighted with them, as they afford him juft rifes to reward them. How far from
mercenary is then God's bounty ! fince he accepts our acknowledgments of his former
bleflings (chiefly) to make them opportunities of conferring frelh ones , as good old
Jfaac defired his Ion's venifon, that from the rclilhing of that lavory meat he might Oe0-
take an opportunity to blefs him.
And the better to difcover, how difinterefted God's favours are, let us further
confider, how little they are requitable ; for we can give him nothing but his own
(nor, heaven knows, all that neither :) and both the will and power to ferve him
are his, upon fo juft and many fcores, that we are unable to retribute, unlefs we do
reftore ; and all the duties we can pay our maker are lei's properly requitals than
reftitutions. When David and his officers had offered towards the llructure of that
magnificent temple, which they feemed ambitious to make a manfion inferiour to
heaven only j the king himfelf gave three thoufand talents of gold, and feven of refined
filver} and the heads of the people five thoufand talents (befides ten thoufand
drachms) of gold, ten thoufand talents of filver, eighteen thoufand of brafs, and a
hundred thoufand of iron (a treafure, of which I fcarce remember to have read the
like in any hiftory) befides a number of all manner of precious ftones, capable of
impoverifhing the very Indies. They perfumed this noble and unequalled offering
with a folcmn confeffion, which perhaps, in God's eftccm was much more precious
than it : Thine, O Lord (fays the royal prophet in the name of all) is the greatnefs, « ch™,
and the power; and the glory., and the vitlory, and the majefty ; for all that is in heaven
'™
6
' 1
and in earth is thine. Thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and tbou art exalted as bead above
all. Both riches and honour come of thee, and thou rcigncft over all. And in thine hand
is power and might ; and in thine band it is to make great, and to give firengtb unto all.
Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praife thy glorious name. But who am I?
and what is my people, that weJhould be able to offer fo willingly after this fort t for all
things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. For we are ftrangers before
thee, and fojourners, as were all our fathers. Our days on earth are as a Jhadow, and
there is none abiding. O Ixrd our Cod, all tbis ftore, that we have prepared to build thee
an boufe, for thy holy name, ccmeth of thine hand, and is all thine own. Who (fays the
R|i<|) ^
Apoftle, in a queftion that imports its own negative) baih firft given to him, and it jj j6.
/hall be recompenfed to him again ? for of him, and through him, and to him, are all things.
Nay, even our love itfelf (that poor man's furety and exchequer, that doth pay all
his debts by fupplying him with the prerogative to coin his defires and wilhes of an
arbitrary value) is here unable to dilcharge our debts ; our love being too much the
effect, to be capable of being the recompenfe of God's. And furely, the divine
amorifts had caufc to fay, that herein is love, not that we loved God, but that be loved* J1**"'
us. And, as the fame Apoftle eli'ewhere fpeaks, ice love him, becaufe he firft loved us. I^ni*.
Vol. I. Nn If,'*
Digitized by Google
274 Seraphic Lave,
If, in effect, we look upon the unworthy contcft betwixt God's mercies and moft
men's ingratitude, and but rcflcft upon the fmall return of love that the greateft
dilburlcmcnts of his do ufuaUy bring home ; we cannot but acknowledge (as David
in the lately mentioned fcripture did) that our loving God for his favours, is one of
the greatcft favours that we love him for. So unrequitable is God's love, and fo infolvent
are we, that that love vaftly improves the benefit, by which alone we might
have pretended to fome ability of retribution v and fo unlimited is this impotence of
ours to recompenfe or repay God's dilcction, that it extends to, and fetters our very
wifhes. For God enjoys an affluence of felicity, fo perfect and entire, that even our
withes can aim at nothing for him worthy of him, unlcfs inftru&cd by what he already
actually poffeflcs ; and the fenfe of this fame very impotence, to fome of the
greateft proficients in Serapbic Love, appears not the leaft uneafy property of it. It
grieves us ienfibly, to fee ourfelves reduced to be only paflive, and the receivers in
this commerce. We would fain contribute fomcthing, and cannot always refrain
from devoting our wifhes to increafe his happinefs, to whom we owe all ours. And
fome holy peifons (particularly St. Auftin) have, by the exuberance of their gratitude
and devotion, been tranfported to make wifhes, and uie exprefiions, wherein their
affections had a greater {hare than their reafon, and which argued them much better
to apprehend, how much God deferved of them, than how little he needed them.
But, upon lecond thoughts, we (hall find, that the caufc of our grief ought to turn
it into our joy, fince the defires we would frame, aiming at God's being infinitely
happy, are all fulfilled before they are conceived, and that in the moft advantageous
and noblcft way ; for could God's happinefs a<!mit accefiion by our accomplished
wifhes, there were then a pollibility ot his wanting fomething to render it compleat.
And lure, it is a more fupreme felicity to be by nature tranlcendently above all increafe
of blcffcdncfs, than to receive the greateft, that men can wifh.
SiB. it. To proceed now to the conftancy of God's love •, we cannot entertain of God any
apprehenfions, not altogether unworthy of him, and criminally injurious to him,
without believing, that to think, that he can be inconflant, is as great a crime as it
were a mifery to find him fo. 1 lis love is like his efience, immutably eternal, reaching
from cvcrlafting to evcrlafting ; it preceded the nativity of time, and will furvive
j.h»r««i. its utmoft period and obfequies. Having loved bis own, which ware in the world, be
j«jn. i. itt°
ve^ tljcm UttSo en^ ,ay s tne F-vanytuft : and when St. James had told us, that
every good gift and every pcrfell gift is frctti above and ccmelb down from tbe fctbtr of
UgbtSy he adds (to complete our confoiation) with whom is no variablcnefs, neither
fbadow of turning. Of his own a /'// begat be us of tbe word of truth. And in efieft,
fince God takes the motives of his love to us from himfelf, not from us, the unchangeab'enefs
of his nature Items ftrongly to infer that of his charity, and our hapm
»i. iu.6. p-mc(s ;n j t porj j am ffa jjgf^ J change not ; therefore yt fans of Jaccb are not cenfumed,
fays God by the laft of his prophets : and in Jeremiah he tells his people, /
have loved thee with an everlafling love. And what God once faid to the generous
Toft. i. $. Jojhuah, I will never leave thee nor forfake tbee, is by the writer to the Hebrews apkoVij
1 ' 5 Plictlto believers in general ; for tbe gifts and calling of Cod (fays the fame author
i». elfewhcre) are without repentance. Nor do thofe crolfes, that feem due to his anger,
deftroy the immutability of his love, fiace even that anger is an effect of it, proceeding
from a fatherly impatience of feeing a fpot unwiped off, in the face he loves
too w>.Tl to '~lv a blemifh in it ; and from his delirc to fee his child an object fit for a
Jargcr meafure of his kindnels : as when we beat the duft out of a fuit wc fancy, we
ttrikc not out of anger, but only to remove tliat, which doth fully it, and hinder us
to
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love.
to take that delight in it, which our fondnefs would be pleafed with a juft caufc to
find. As many as I /eve, J rebuke and chaften (lays our Saviour.) And, / htOVt, 0*«!»•«>•
Lord (fays the Pfalmift) that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfuhefs haft JJ
1
affiled me ; the furnace of affliction being m ant but to refine us from our earthly
droffinefs, and foften us for the impreflion of God's own (lamp and image.- The
great and merciful architect of his church (whom not only the philofophcrs have
ltiled, but the fcripturc itfelt calls t( tv.'x>k. an artift or artificer) employs not on us the ,Mh * "*•
hammer and the chizzel, with an intent to wound or mangle us, but only to fquare
and fafhion out hard and ftubborn hearts into fuch living Jicnes, as may both grace , Pe!. iif J#
and ftrcngthen his heavenly ftructure. Nor is God only thus conftant to his love-, but
to his lovclinefs. Our female beauties are ufually as fickle in their faces as their ,
minds, and more certainly in the former •, becaufe, though cafualties fhould fparc
them, age brings in a ncceflity of a change, nay, a decay ; leaving our doaten upon
red and white inceflantly perplexed, by the incertainty both of the continuance of
their miftrefs's kindnefs, and of the lailing of her beauty (both which are neccflhry
to the amorift's joys and quiet) : for, fometimes, when the miftrefs's humour doth
not change fo much, as to prove guilty of the fault of inconftancy, her face alters
enough to make her lovers wifb inconftancy no fault; or, that fhc had committed it,
chat her ficklenefs might afford them the excufe of imitation or revenge. But, in
devotion, we are equally fecurc from both thefe dangers ; fmce God doth not defift
from blefling us with his love, nor ceafes ever from deferving the height of ours.
Nor is he only conftant in making us the objects of his love, but alfo in bending
and inclining us to make him the objett of our ftrongeft aff'eftions ; fo that he nut
only perfifts in continuing to us both the offer and value of his love, but pcrfevercs
to give us a receptive difpofition to welcome it to us, and reflect it up to him. The
want of fuch a difpofition loft Adam paradife, and the fallen angels heaven ; there
being to the object, that muft fecure our love, fuch a nature requifite in reference to
our affections, as philofophcrs are pleafed to afcribe to the world's center in relation to
heavy bodies, which, they teach us, that magnetic point has the double faculty, not
only to draw thither, but to keep there. For fo untoward and crofs-grained arc we,
in point of our own good, and fo unfit to procure, and ready to defert, our own felicity,
that neither its excellency is a fufficicnt motive to carry our addrcflcs to it, nor
its poflcflion a competent tie to intercept in us all defigns of revolts and divorces :
but we muft be ufed as pceviffi children are, who (on the one fide) when their mouths
are out of taftc, and they refute to take what is necefTary for them, muft have it not
only offered them, but forced upon them, and be (as it were) made to receive it ; and
who (on the other fide) muft be reftrained from gadding, when the beauty of the
manfions they live in cannot invite their ftay, but they would gladly leave the
proudeft palaces architecture can boaft, to run into the ftrcet, and dabble in the
kennel. All thefe three properties of divine conftancy are not ill fhadowed in the
operations of the loadftone (a mineral, in which 1 have made too many experiments,
not to be by you allowed to make fome comparifons to it.) For, firft, it never forfakes
its inclinations for the fteel •, next, being united to it, it retains fo conftantly
its attractive qualities, that it gives not the needle any motive of defcrting it •, and
thirdly, it doth never rightly touch the amorous fteel, without leaving an impreflion,
which ever afcer difpofes it to a convcrfion to that magnetic pofturc, which beftjks
it to receive frefli influences. To which let me add this other rcfemblance betwixt
God's work on us, and the loadftone's on the iron, that the kind ftone attracts a
needle to it, not to advantage itfclf by that union, but to impart its virtue to what
Nn 2 it
276 Seraphic Love.
it draws. Befidcs, abfcncc and rivals, thofe frequent ruiners of other lovers happinefs,
can threaten nothing of formidable to yours. For, abfence (which fo divorces
us from that, which animates us, that lovers do not fo improperly ftile it death, if
death be but the feparation of foul and body) by God's ubiquity we are fecured
from v he is ever prefent with us, or rather in us. You, that, not long fincc, fo
highly valued the opportunities of converting with your miftrefs for fome few moments,
mall here find your privileges improved to a permiflion , nay, an invitation,
of entertaining the object ot your love at all times ; no hour renders your vifits unfeafonable,
nor no length tedious : he is rather welcomed to God, that comes to him
ottneft, and (lays with him longed. What favours were vouchsafed to that antient
prophetefs (who was likewife one of the firft evangel ids) who for many years departed
i " not from the temple, butferved Cod with faflings and prayers night and day, the beginning
aq. »i. a:, of .St. Luke's gofpel may inform me. The midnight hymns of Paul and Silas did not
Sc' only not difturb or offend him they praifed, but procured the vifit of an angel to bring
them miraculous and unexpeded liberty, as a proof of the acceptablenefs of their
Ce». r, ii, fecmingly unfeafonable devotions. When Enoch bad walked with God as many years
»j.*4- ^ the year has days, God was fo far from being importuned or tired by that lading
afliduity, that vouchfafing him an unexampled exemption from death, he was pleafcd
by a new and a nearer cut to heaven, to admit him to a yet clofcr, more immediate,
and more undiftracted communion with himfclf. And when Mcfes had fpent no lefs
T*•J • than forty days andforty nights in convtrfing (if I may ufe fo familiar a term) with God
J0* in the mount, he brought down thence, inltead of a penance for his importunity, fo
lignal and radiant a tcftimony of God's peculiar favour, that his dazzled countrymen
were as much difabled, as invited, to gaze on an object of fo much wonder. Arid
then, how proud do we fee many lovers of their fufferings, when lhe but knows of
them, for whom they are endured ? But in Seraphic Love, there is not the lead good
wifh, or privated iufTering, nay, not a whifpering figh, or clofer thought, that
filcntly groans or afpires in the amorous foul, but he both fees and hears, that puts
tux M.8.
his fervants tears into his bottle, fweetening and recompenGng the grcatcd misfortunes
that his love occafions, with fuch fupport and joys, as hinder us to feel them, and
Kl, make them defcrve a contrary name. Each amorous foul may fay to God with Da-
»»».•, j. vijt <ff.cu knowtft my down-Jitting, and my up-rifing ; thou underftandrfi my thoughts afer
off; thou compaffeft my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways.
And Chrift alfo himfclf has fo attentive an eye upon the amorous foul, that he is
»ct.u.s.
held forth in the Apocalypfe, as telling the ruler of the church of Smyrna, I knov>
tby works, and tribulation, and poverty and faying to the angel of the church of Per-
>'«"'/« J • gamus, I know tby works, and where thou dwetlefl, even where Satan's feat is; and thou
holdeflfaft my name, and baft not denied my faith, even in thofe days, wherein Antipas was
my faithful martyr, who was Jiain among you, where Satan dwelletb. So that no endearing
circumdance of our love cfcapes unobferved by him, who has done and fuf-
( ^ fered fo much to engage us to it. God remembers not our endeavours to ferve him
iT.'efr.*' the lefs, for our having forgotten them : When faw we thee any way diftreffed, and relieved
thee ? will be the qucdion of thofe, to whom heaven itfelf will be at the lad
day awarded, as having minidered to their Redeemer. Thofe, that in degenerate
times, fuch as ours, Lindamor, did, like Lot in Sodom, mourn for their fins, that
mourned not for their own, and condoled among themfelves the fpreading wickednefs
of the times they lived in •, though probably the dangers threatened them by the
very finfulnefs they deplored made them affect fuch privacies in their conferences, as
freed them from the thoughts of being over-heard ; yet the fcripture informs us (and
it
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 277
it is a comfortable as well as memorable paflage) that the Lord hearkened and beard it, M*t w
J d £00* 0/ remembrance was written before him, for tbem, that feared tbe Lord, and 1
'
*7'
that thought upon bis name : then /ball he return, and difcern betwixt tbe righteous and tbe
wicked, between bim that fervetb God, and bim that fervetb bim not. I know, fays Rc " a- 9»
Chrift (not only to the angel of Smyrna, but to each true fuffcrcr for him) tby works,
and tribulation, and poverty : fear none of tbefe tbigs, that thou /bait fuffer ; be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. God is often plcaied to accept
thole good thoughts and intentions of his fervants, which never arrive at actual performances.
Though David builc not the temple he defigned, yet his fon, that did
it, informs us, that God laid unto him •, Forafmucb as it was in thine heart to build an *
ii
c
^
rc
boufe for my name, thou didft well in that it was in thine heart, 13c. And it is the epithet
our Saviour gives God, your Father whichfeetb in fecret, i$c. Nor need we fear M,t- * •»
our rivals mould lupplant us, Once we can have none in devotion, whofe prayer and
endeavour it is not, that God would love us more. For his love to you being (as
the chiefeft merit) the ftrongeft motive and title unto theirs, they cannot but wilh
him well, whom God doth love fo ; and cannot wifli him better, than by imploring
for him frefb additions, both of that love of God, and grateful diipofuions to return ^•*, "T -7>
it. Our Saviour aflures us, that there isjoy in the prefence of the angels of God over one
/inner that repentttb. And the fole hymn (except a viuonary one) I find recorded of Uto «. ij»
the eclcftial choir, was fung for a bkfiing to mankind, wherein (for aught 1 know)
their love and fympathy alone concerned them : For unto us (men) tbe child is born, ioi.u. fi.
and unto us tbe Son is given, who took not upon bim tbe nature of angels, but tbe feed of
Abraham. So noble and fo difintercfted doth divine love make ours, that there is no- h*. a. tu
thing, befides the object of that love, that we love more than our concurrents in it,
perchance out of a gratitude to their affifting us, to pay a debt (of love and praife)
tor which alas ! we find our fingle felvcs but too infolvcnt.
Perhaps I need not mind you, Lindamor, that divers paflages of the foregoing^ ,r
difcourfe fuppofe the truth of their doctrine, who afcribe to God, in relation to every
man, an eternal, unchangeable and inconditionate decree of election, or reprobation.
Yet concerning the controverfies betwixt the Calvinifts and the Remonftrants about
predeftination, and the coherent doctrines, it were improper to give you here my
fenfe. Thofe, that are truly pious of either party, are perhaps otherwife looked on
by God than by any other, as contending, which of God's attributes Ihould be mofl.
refpected ; the one feeming to affirm irrespective decrees, to magnify his goodnels
and the other to deny them, but to fecure the credit of his juitice. And even inhonouring
the fame attribute, his goodnefs, thefe adverfaries feem rivals, the one
party fuppofing it bed celebrated by believing it fo irrefiftible, that to whomfoevcr
it is intended, he cannot but be happy and the other thinking it mod extolled by
being believed fo univerfal, that it will make every man happy, if he pleafes : the
one party electing to honour free-grace, by aligning it (as to men) an unlimited vaft
extent ; as the other does, by afcribing it an infallibly victorious degree. But though
my hafte, and the nature of my theme make me decline the controverfies about
predeftination j yet fince the doctrine, that maintains it, is not only by almoft all the
reft of mankind, but by the reft of the proteftant churches thcmlelves (the Lutherans,
and divers learned divines of the church of England) not only rejected, but
detefted as little lefs than blalphcmous (as indeed they, that judge it an error*
cannot but be tempted to think it a dangerous one, and of very pernicious confequence,
{o fur forth as its fequels are permitted to have influence on men's practice)
J think it not amifs to advertife you, that the doctrine of predeftination is not neceflary
to>
Digitized by Google
278 Seraphic Love.
to juftify the freenefs and the greatnefs of God's love. For fo confpicuous and refulgent
a truth is that of God's being the author of man's felicity, that the difpute
betwixt the Calvinitls and Arminians is not fo much concerning the thing, as concerning
the manner of its being proffered ; the former affirming grace to be irreiillibly
prcfcntcd ; the latter though they deny it to be iirejc&able, yet granting, not
only that it is altogether free and undefcrved, but alfo, that the proffer is made, both
with a power enabling thole, to whom it is rendered, to accept it, and with fuch engaging
invitations, that man at his firlt converfion need contribute nothing to his felicity,
but the not wilfully refuting it, and may more properly be faid to owe it unto
God, than the beggar to owe his alms to his reliever, though he opens his hand to
receive it •, which he might have declined to do, if he would have wilfully courted
his own prejudice. Chnlk paid a ranfom to redeem us, it is true, and he is therefore
• Pet. ii. 1. called, the Lord that bought us : but it was God's free goodnefs, both to provide us
thatChrilt, and to accept of that ranfoin, neither of which he was obliged to do-,
and therefore the fcripture afcribes it not to the jufticc, but to the love of God to the
John world, that befent bis only begotten Sen to redeem it : and St. Paul in the fame text tells
Arm. in. us, both thattt* are juftified, ktft£$ t* xulu x«>»1t} freely by bis grace, and yet that it h,
«4- iid t?« *r*taTfMc-iwr, thrcugb the redemption (purchafed tor a ranfom j the original word
Engliftied redemption relating to-the price paid for the redeeming of captives) that is
in '/ejus ( brijl. It is confeffed on all liands, that merit muff be dilclairned, and thofc
that feem to exped fomething from God as a due, acknowledge, that if his promife
did not, their adions could not, make it fo ; and that it is to his mercy they owe the
5»
T
g.
m-,T
' »ght they have to confide in his juftice. St. Paul, who having fought tbe good fight,
finifhed bis courfe, and kept tbe faith, expected a cr<nvn of righttoufvefs from tbe Lord, under
Erb. H.g. tne n0tion of the righteous judge-, yet, tells us, that by grace wc are faved, through faith,
and that net of ourfelves, it is the gift of God. Whole promifes, now they are made us, al-
• P<t.i.+. low us indeed to exped heaven from his julticc; but tbe making us thofe great andprecious
promifes (as St. Peter juftly itylcs them) mud be acknowledged the pureeffedof bisfree
and undefervedgoodnefs ; which to believe infinite, we need but confuler the difproportion
betwixt fuch a recompenfe as eternal glory, and the leall impcrfed performances of ours:
which though they needed not pardon, could not at lead challenge any reward from
him, who, as our Creator, has fuch a right to exad of us what fcrvi.es he pleafes,
without propofing us any recompence, that Our exadell obedience to all his commands
UtontL would yet leave us toconfefs ourfelves unprofitable fen-ants, who have done but -xbat it
was cur duty to do ; and what, if we had not done, we had given God, who had the
power, the right and provocation to puniffi us. And indeed, fo confeious are men
generally (if not naturally) to their being beholden to God for their felicity, that
even thofe, that miltake or oppole his way of doing them good, will yet be furc to
find out ibme notion or other, under which they may conceive therr.fclves God's
debtors for his blcflings. That the more fober fort of Romifh catholics themlclvcs
afcribe not fo muth to merit (properly fo called) nor fo little to God's grace, as the
more quarrelfome writers of their party have given the more eager difputants of ours
occafion to reproach them, were perhaps no difficult tafk to manifeft, if my haftc
would give me leave. That the Arminians own the freenefs and unmeritednefs of
• FfpdtU, God's grace, the Remonltrants * confeffion and apology ore very careful to fatisfy the
aw"< world. And even the Socinians (how profperouny rdctermine not) are not a little,
6."" ' or uninduftrioufly follicitous to free their erroneous dodrine of jullification from the
Hab 1 l6 objeded guilt of its tendency to draw the embracers of it tofacrifice to their oivn nets,
and thank themlclvcs for their felicity. Which brings into my mind a pafiage, that
J lately
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 379
I lately read in one of the chief modern upholders of that feet, ScbHebthtgius who
is wont, in my opinion, where his fubjefl will bear it, to difcourfe as fairly anil as
rationally as almolt any writer that I have met with of his pcrfuafion , and who labours
to reconcile Sorinus his doctrine with the freenefs of God's grace, by confiderations,
which, not to injure him, I lhall prefent you with in his own words. Ad retundendam
veto (lays he, dii'puting againft the learned Meifnerus) arrogantiam jujlificatorum,
6? ne dicant ft meruijjegratiamy non eft necejfe firvum in bominc arttitrium induecrt \
non debet virtus toili, ut toUatur arrogantia. Sttjficit, i. Quod nec t elle nec perficere
poffint, nifi Deus Cs? oJuntatem excite!, fcf vires augeat. 2. ^nod ea, qux divinis adjuti ?i<
viribns faciunt, nulla modo dignitate & pretio divin<e gratis refpendeat, fed infinito inter-
-jallo ab ea abfint. Nay, though the modern and degenerate Jews be, upon the fcore
of being the great patrons of man's free-will, not caufclcfsly cftccmed the great oppugncrs
of God's free-grace ; yet both from their famous Rabbi, and my learned
acquaintance, Mana£lb Ben-Ifrael, and from divers others of dieir molt eminent
writers, has the truth fometimes extorted confeflions, which, though made upon erroneous
grounds, were not very far fliort of orthodox. To which purpofe I remember,
that a Jewifh profeflbr of Hebrew (who aflilted me in my ftudies of that myikrioustongue)
being, as the reft of his nation,, an eager and peremptory champion of freewill,
conceived, that even that liberty, which to us iecms lealt to indebt men to
their Creator, did tranfeendently oblige him un:o God. For, one day that we were
privately and freely dil'courfing together of matters of religion, he told me, he
thought men Owed more to God's goodncls, than the very angels do. For, laid he,
whereas God, without any good work of theirs, but purely out of his goodnds, conferred
on them that bit-It condition they enjoy, by giving man a free-will, by the good
ufeof which he may glorify his Maker, when, by abuling it, it is in his power to
dishonour him ; he allows man that higheft iatisfaction and privilege, of co-operating
to his own felicity.
And now, Kiadamtrt we are arrived at the lad | roperty, which qualifies God the s,n iffitteft
object for our love, which is, the advantageoulhels of his to us, both in the
prdi-nt and the future lite. And firfir, even in this world wc owe God no Ids than
all the goo.ls we pollifs. We owe him both what we have, and that we are : for wc
may fay truly of God with the Plalmift, // is be that bath made us, and not we curfches. pfj.t*. ^
And we were not only in his hands lb like clay in ibe jotter's, that he might have made m Uf K
us any thing •, but we were fo purely that negative, from whence we were extracted,
that he (if he had pltafed) for ever might have left us to our iirft nothing. Hir, love
is the rii ft original and fountain-blefling ; all the reft arc but as pipes (and inftrumcnts)
to convey, and ferve but to hand it to us. Your wit wins you applaufe, your
iodullry h<aps you up treafures ; be it granted. B'.;t who gave you that, wit ? and
did both give and prolper that bo;;fted induftry ? Certainly, God as much gives us
a)l the goods we poli'ess, as he that gives a beggar a thoufand pounds, gives him the
clothes, and meat, and all the bravery it helps him to. But bdides theie more obvious
prefents of God's bounty, wc enjoy other effects of his goodnef?, which,
though by the cuflomarincis of their being poiUlild, they prove Ids COnfpicuOUS than
the other, yet grow no lei's prized, when the want or lots of them makes us fcnftble
of the true value of them. Had I the leifure, Lhulimor, to lead your thoughts with
me to the galleys, and fhew you there thofe wretched captives, that arc chained to
the oars they tug at, and though expofed to all the mderics and hardships of a tempestuous
lea, have oftentimes caufe given them, by their barbarous ulage alhorc, to
fear the ocean J|efs than any porr^ favc death. Could I draw from you the curtains of
lick
3
Digitized by Google
280 Seraphic Love.
lick and dying men, and open to you that fad fcene, where fome pine and languilh
by diftempers, that deprive them of all joys, advantages, and (what is more conlider*
able) ufcs of life, before they cafe them of life itfelf •, others breathe rather than live,
perpetually tormented either with their difeafes or phytic to protract a wretched life,
upon terms that turn it into a trouble -, and others ftruggling with the rude pangs of
death, are yet, perchance, lcfs tormented by them, than by the fad profpccc of their
former life, and the remembrance of thofc criminal pleafures, wbicb yet it perhaps lefs
troubles tbem that tbey mujl now forego, than that they one* enjoyed them. Should I,
Undamor, bring you into hofpitals, and fhew you there the various fhapes of human
mifery, and how many fouls, narrowly lodged (if I may fo fpeak) in fynecdochical
bodies, fee their earthen cottages moulder away to dull •, thofe miserable perfons by
the lofs of one limb after another furviving but part of themfelves, and living to fee
themfelves dead and buried by piece-meal. Should I, to difpatch, Lind.rnor, fhew
you all the feveral companies of mourners, that almoft make up mankind, ^nd difdofc
to you, how copious fhowers of tears do almoft every where water (not to fay
overflow) this vale of miferies; you would, perchance, fee caufe to think, that
God's privative (if I may fo fpeak) may contend with his pofitive favours ; and that
you owe little lefs for what you are not, than for what you are, to that difcriminating
mercy of his, to which alone you owe your exemption from miferies, as great as
cor.hr. t. the bleffing it confers on you. For, who maketb thee to differ? is a queftion, that
may be as well afked. in reference to our external, as to our fpiritual condition.
"Which invites me to mind you, Undamor, that you arc yet more engaged to God's
love for protecting you from thofe grofs vices, that disfigure moft men's minds, than
from thofe lefs dangerous, though more refentcd difeafes, that diftemper their
bodies.
Pet. l. it. pORj ambition, lufi, avarice, revenge, and even that vain eonverfation, which young
gentlemen arc generally pleafed to think fo innocent, are really more formidable and
pernicious difeafes and calamities, than thofe, that reduce men to take phyfic, or
thruft them into hofpitals. To evince the truth of which paradox, I hope I fhall
not need to mind you of judging of die dangeroufnefs of difeafes by the noblenefs of
that part affected, fince I can tell you, that he, that cannot err, feems daily tojuftify
our affertion, by inflicting ficknefs and the fharpeft outward calamities on his own
deareft children, to preferve them from the contagion of fin, or cure them of the
unfilial habitudes of it. And therefore, fince, when we fee a tender mother apply a
painful cauftic to the neck of her favourite-infant, threatened by the apoplexy, we
fcruple not to conclude, that fhc thinks the trouble of an iffue, an evil inferior to the
convulfion fit j fo when we fee our heavenly father fends infirmities and croflcs, to
refcue thofe he loves, from the contagion or dominion of fin ; we may fafely conclude,
he thinks affliction a lefs evil than guilt, fince he is too wife and indulgent a
phyfician to cure with a remedy worfe than the difcafe. In the eighth of Deuteronomy,
there is a caution given the Ifraelites, left profperity (which is wont to be a kind of
Lethe, that makes men forget all but their enjoyments) fhould make any of them fay
Dw^.ifi.
jn nis heart, my power, and the might of my hand bath gotten me ibis wealth. But (faith
>7'
'
' my text) tbeyjball remember the Lord their Cod •, for be it is, that givetb tbem power to
get wealth. It is not the revolting Ifraelites only, of whofe ignorance of his bounty
n*t »i. j. God may complain, as he did by the prophet, by whom he laid, / taught Epbraim
to go, taking tbem by their arms, but tbey knew not that I healed tbem : and there are
H«r.i. »j9 . but too many, of whom he might fay, as he did by the fame prophet: For Jbedid
not know, that Igave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied her fther and hergold,
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 281
which they preparedfor Baal; therefore will I return and take away my com in the time
thereof, and my wine in the feafon thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax given to
her nakednefs. And' this will make way for the ddccfniggnn I had to recommend the
advantageoufnefs of God's lovr, by faying, that as for fpiritual goods, he gives us
in this life fo rich an earned: of expected joys, that even the earned is a (lock large
enough tofubfift with comfort on, and really out-values and tranlcends all thofe momentary
pleafurcs, it requires us to forfake, to keep up a title to eternal ones. But
to particularize God's mercies to us in this very life, would certainly take up a con- •
fiderable part of it. And yet the love God bears us dies not with us, nor doth (as
men's affections) either endure a funeral in our tombs, or furvive only in a ufclcfs
grief (or an elteem as bootlefs). No, God's love is fo far from refemblmg the ufual
fort of friends, who, when they have accompanied us to the grave, do there leave
us; that, like the angels, that carried Lazarus's foul to Abraham's bofom, its officiouf- Lafciiti.
nels begins then molt to appear, when our dark eyes are clofcd, and is then trueft to**-
the beloved foul, when (he forfakes the body giving each blefied faint caufe to fay of
God, what Naomi did of Boaz, that he hath not left off his kindnefs to the living, and R»ti». ii. to.
to the dead. Now, indeed (fays our Saviour's favourite) are we tb? fans of God, and
,
.
bn
',
t
it doth not yet appear what wefhall be; but we knew, when be fhall appear, we fhall be t.
Uke him. This blefTed expectance mult be now my theme, becaufe the narrow limits,
which my defign hath placed to this difcourfe (of the advantages accruing from God's
love) will leave no more room untaken up by heaven.
But, Lindamor, before I proceed to fet forth to you the greatnefs of the felicity ,9.
referved for us in heaven, it will, I fear, be requifite to mind you of the lawfulnefs
of having an eye to it. For many, not undefervedly, applauded preachers have of
lute been pleafed to teach the people, that to hope for heaven is a mercenary legal,
and therefore unfilial affection. Indeed, to hope for heaven as wages for work performed,
or by way of merit, in the proper and ftrict acception of that term, were a
preemption, to which none of the divines, we diffent from, can be too much an
enemy, nor perhaps more fo than i am. But to take in God's bleffings among the
motives of loving God, is, but to do as he did, who faid, / love the Lord becaufe be™'-™'-
hath heard my voice and my fupplicaticns ; and to look upon the joys of heaven, to
comfort and fuppqrt us in the hardfhips and lofles to be undergone in our journey
thitherward, is to imitate no worfe a man than Mofes, of whom it is faid, that be
f[cb xi jfc
ejleemed the reproach of CLrift greater riches than the treafures in Egypt •, for be bad refpetl,
or turned his eye (*ViCXiiri) unto the reccmpence of the reward. It is indeed, llndamor,
a happy frame of mind, to be able to love God purely for himfclf, without
any glance at our own advantages. But though I dare not deny, that it is pofliblc
to attain to fo high and diftnterelted a kind of love, yet I think, that that excellency
fuppofed to be vouchfafed to fome men, is not by the fcripturc exacted as a duty
from all men. Were all the recompenfe of piety of a worldly nature, and to be here
received, the actions invited to, by the intuition of it, might pals for mercenary. But
when heaven is chiefly hoped for, as it will admit us unto the fruition of God himfclf
in Chrifr, and that the other joys expected there arc fo far from being of a fenfual
or a worldly nature, that they arc known not to be attainable, till by death, the fenfes
and bodies themfelves, and all the merely animal faculties be abolilhed : for a heaven
fo confidcred, I fay, to forego readily all the pleafurcs of th-.' fenfes, and undergo
chearfully all the hardlhips and dangers, that are wont to attend a holy life, is Lindamor,
fuch a kind of mercennrinefs, as none, but a reltgned, noble, and believing
foul is likely to be guilty of. If I fhould fay -, that fear itfelf, and even the fear of
Vol. I O o hcil,
Digitized by Google
282 Seraphic Love,
hell, may be one juftifiable motive of men's aftions, though I mould propofe, what
thofe I am reafoning with would think a paradox ; yet I Ihould perhaps hold forth
'• therein no more than the fcripture docs, Let us therefore fear, (fays the writer to the
Hebrews) left apremi/e being left us of entering into bis reft, any of youfball fern to com
fart of it. And no lefs eminent an herald of the gofpcl than St. Paul, who fuccclsfully
maintained the evangelical againft the legal fpirit, thus profefleth of himlelf;
iCt». ia. J keep under my body, and bring it into fubjeclion, left by any means, when I have preached
toothers* I myfelf fhould be a caji away. And it was not to Oaves or hirelings, that
Chrift direcls this admonition; Ifay unto you, my friends, be not afraid of them* that
till the body, and after that have no more that they can do : but I willforewarn you whom
you fballfear ; fear bim, which, after be bath killed, hath power to caft into beU ; yea, I
Uk 18 unt0 yeu ( a gemination, which the prefent controverfy ftiews not to have been caui'e-
4,5. ' lefs)/|rar bim. Where the paraphralc given of God is not barely defcriptive, but
ratiocinative (to borrow thole terms of the fchools) in warning us not only whom we
fhould, and fhould not fear, but why we mould fear the one, and not the other. As
when St. Paul fays, / know whom I have trufted, he means what manner of perfon,
• Pet. i». howfaithful (as St. Peter elfewherc calls God) and bow omnipotent; whence immei'-
rim. u diately he adds, And I am perfuaded, that be is able to keep that which I have committed
«»• unto bim againft that day. More texts of the fame import might be added, if the
defign of thole already alleged were other than to facilitate the aclmiflion of the more
plaufiblc truth we have been making out, and which to us feems very clearly hrld
forth in thofe and the like fcripturcs, which are therefore cited out of the new teftament,
that they might have the greater authority with one fort of our antagonifts. /
Piui ia trefs towar^ the mar^ °f the prize of the high calling of God in drift Jefus. Bleffed arc
*«*.
X
xx\u that do bis commandments, that tbey may have right to the tree of life, and may enter
»
4
fim »i
"; t^rouZ^> tbe gates into the city 1 laying up in flore for tbemfelves a goodfoundation againft
,9
, '"" *
' the time to come, that tbey may lay bold of eternal life. To them, who by patient continuing
in well-doing, feek for (fyroZri) glory, and honour, and immortality, eternal life. And of
Chrift himlelf, whole love to God is qucftionlefs filial and unequalable, it is faid,
p om.ii. Jacking unto Jefus the author andfinifher of our faith, who, for the joy that was fet be-
Hek.iii. ». f0re bim, endured the crofs, defpifed the Jbame, and is Jet down at the right band of the
throne of God. Nor fee I, why it fhould be unfilial for a child of God to further the
raifing of thofe paffions, which his heavenly Father intends to have railed in him,
upon the fame grounds and motives, that God is pleafed to employ to excite them.
And fince the fcripture feems plainly to invite our hopes, by recording St. PauPs hav-
1 Ccr. «. ing faid, Every man, that Jlrivetbfor the maflery, is temperate in all things ; now they do
1J ' it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible : And by reprefenting our Sa-
M,r. r. ,,. v'our himfelf, as faying in one place, Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your
k«. ii." ia. reward in heaven : In another, He thou faithful unto death, and I willgive thee a crown
of life. And in divers others fpcakingto the likepurpofe ; fince, I fay, the fcripture
feems thus to allure our hopes, would it not be a kind of accufing it of an aptnefs
to delude and enfnare us, to teach, that it propofeth to us the powcrfulleft objects to
incite our paffions, if it be finful to cherifh and harbour the paffions naturally belonging
to thofe objects ? And certainly, Lindatnor, fince God, who, as our Creator,
knows the frame and conftitution of man's foul, incomparably better than he himfelf,
is pleafed to deal with our hopes and our fears, to engage us to his fervicc ; it very
ill becomes us, either to quarrel with his methods of working on our fpirits, or CO
reject a.iy help, which he has been pleafed to afford a piety, which, for aught ever I
could obfervc, do;s even in the beft men find rcfiftance enough to keep any help, that
can
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love, 283
can be employed to promote it, from being fupexititious. And truly, the animating
or difcouraging influence, that hope, or the want of it, is wont to have upon our endeavours,
makes me very apprchenfive, that fince the enlivening hopes of heaven are
not able to make moft men's endeavours other than very languid, the forbidding
thofe fupporting hopes would foon weaken and decreafe our endeavours into none
at all.
But, Lindamor, though I may perhaps have taken fome pains in ftudying contro- M. 20.
verfial divinity, yet I take fo little pleafure in writing of it, that though not only a
feafonable duty to truth, but a neceffary one to the enfuing part of this difcourfc,
have preflcd me to ferve in this caufc yet I fhall perhaps obtain your pardon fooner
than my own, for having thus long fufpended the difcourfing to you of the advantageoulnefs
of God's love to us, as it gives us here a right, and will hereafter give us
admiffion to heaven ; heaven, the bright feat of fo much happinefs, that we fhall
fcarcely count amongft our joys, that heaven is the feat of them. There the excellency
of the poflefled goods (hall as much difappoint our expectations, as in other
fruitions the emptinefs is wont to do. The Apoftle tells us, that eye bath not feert, 1 Cw.;;. 9.
nor ear beard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared/
or them that love him. Such pure refined delights not only (loop not unto fenfe,
but are fublime enough even to tranfeend imagination. When fancy hath formed
and fhaped the perfected ideas, that its abftractions can make, of blefTednefs ; our
own more happy experiences of greater muft difabufe us, when we come to heaven ;
which is a foil, whole fruitfulnefs is fo confined to joy, that even our difappointments
and xniftakes (hall there contribute to our happinefs which will fo much partake of
his immcnfity, whofe gift it is, that you fee the Apoftle gives it a negative defcription ;
and to create in us apprchenfions underogatory from what we fhall poflefs, not only
removes our thoughts from all we do enjoy, but exalts them above all 'that we can
fancy. At which way of proceeding, that you may the lefs wonder, Lindamor, be
pleated to confider, that in heaven our faculties (hall not only be gratified with fuitable
and acceptable objects, but fhall be heightened and enlarged, and confequently
our capacities of happinefs as well incrcafed as filled. A child not yet releafcd out
of the homely prifon of the womb cannot there poffibly frame ideas of thofe delights,
which will be afforded him by the pleafing noifes, and the glittering objects, that will
prefent themfelves to him after his birth. And the fame child, whilft he continues
in his non-age, though he may with delight look upon emblems finally drawn and
painted, and may take fome pleafure in beholding the neat and furprizing characters
and flourifhes of a Greek and Hebrew bible curioufly printed ; yet he cannot then
imagine the pleafure the fame objects will afford him, when age and ftudy fhall have
ripened and inftructcd his intellectuals, and made him capable both of underllanding
and relifhing the excellent moralities, couched in thofe ingenious emblems, and the
profound and faving myftcries, wherewith that divine book, the fcripture (efpeciallv
in its original tongues) does, to an intelligent and religious perufer, appear rcplenifhca.
Such a double advantage, Lindamor, among others, the admiffion into heaven brings
thole, to whom that blefling is vouchfafed : for befides that fet of objects (if I may
fofpeak) fo new and fo peculiar to heaven, that their ideas could never enter into
men's thoughts before their admiffion there ; befides this, I fay, our then enlarged
capacities will enable us, even in objects which were not altogether unknown to us
before, to perceive things formerly undifcerned, and derive thence both new and
greater fatisfactions and delights. Wonder not, Lindamor, that in mentioning the
joys of heaven, 1 ufe the expreffions I find lefs detractory from a themt-, as much
O o 2 above
Digitized by Google
284 Seraphic Love.
above our praifcs, as the heaven they are enjoyed in is above our heads. For,
though fuch expreffions may fecm fomewhat tumid and afpiring, and fitter much for
one that celebrates, than for one that but alerts ; yet cannot I lcruple to ufe fceming
hyperboles in the mention of felicities, which make the highclt hyperboles but fecming
ones. For thofe joys, IJndamor, of heaven, are like its liars, which, by reafon
of our remotcnefs from them, appear extremely little, though really in thcmfelves
they are fo vaft, that a lefs than the largeft is by odds greater than the biggeft object
upon earth, nay, than the whole earth itfelf. And therefore as if I were to take you
with me to contemplate the planets, I would Ihew you them through fuch a telefcope,
as by a greatning thofe bright objects in comparifon of what to an unaflifted eye they
appear, doth fomewhat leficn the difadvantage of rcmotenefs, and fhews them with lefs
detraction from their true magnitude ; fo mentioning to you the felicities of heaven,
I think it not unlawful or improper to endeavour, by reprefentations tranfeending
what they appear, to give you notions lefs inferiour to what they arc.
In heaven, then, we fhall taftc happinefs enough, to enable us to rectify the definition
of it. We may there be inltruttcd, how to name and rate all goods, by
thole that will concentre into the felicity we mall pofiefs, which fhall be there made
up of the confluence, perfection, and perpetuity of all true joys. For heaven will
make us happy, not (as philofophy pretends to do) by the confinement, but by the
fruicion of our defires which mall neither fail in the choice of their objects, nor
mifs of the enjoyment of them, but be both unerringly juft, and infallibly accomplifhed
; in the former of which properties (as our then rectified reafon will confider
things) we fhall think ourfelves happier (yet) than in the latter. We fhall there refemble
the faints we here admire, and fhall not only fee, and be like thofe pious
worthies, whofe virtues eclipfe theirs, which among the heathen deified lefs deferving
heroes ; thofe excellent pcrfons, that did as well ennoble as inftruct mankind, giving
us caufe to blufh, that we are men, and whofe flories have the unparallelled honour
H»b.»ii. of being recorded by infpired pens ; thofe fpirtts, I fay, of jujl men made perfect, as
,J " the fcripture terms them, fhall be our conftant and familiar company, into whole
blcffcd fociety we fhall not only be welcome, but increafe it. In heaven, we fhall
have a blofled and familiar converfation with thofe fame glorious fpirits, whofe nature
doth inveft them with fuch a luftre, that all the difadvantage of their difguifes, when
they appear to us, doth fcarce fuffice to confine our raptures to refpects below idolatry,
and darken them into objects for our wonder, not adoration. There we fhall
fee (a fight worthy dying for) that blefTcd Saviour, of whom the fcripture does lb
much and fo excellently entertain us, and who having done and fufiered fo much for
us, docs fo highly deferve of us, both upon the account of his ineftimable benefits.
oIvrT/" Ycs' thcrc mal1 wef"
ce that holv and divine perfon, who, when he vouchfafed (as his
j.,h 1i.1t. favourite-difciplc fpeaks) to pitch his tent among usy and dwell with men on earth, to
fit them by his merits and example to dwell with him in heaven, did fo admirably
mix an awful majefty with an humble meeknefs, and the alTumed infirmities of his
human nature with the feafonaole corufcations of his divine ; and expreffed in his
whole life fo perfect and exemplary a virtue, and yet fo much fweetnefs and gcntlenefs
towards thofe afpirers to it, that were the moll fhort of it ; that the Jews them-
Mit. »»i.j7- Iclves coidd fay of him, that he had done all things well •, and his very enemies, that
were employed to apprehend him as a malefactor, confeffed even to thofe, that fent
J h».»a. them to do fo, that never man /pake like him. And his Apoflles, who had moft op-
** portunity to pry narrowly into his actions, and were of a condition and breeding very
unlike to infufe into them heroic rcfolutions, did in fpight of the frequent reproofs
1 their
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 285
their failings extorted from him, and of the hard (hip. that attended his fervice, think
even death ufelf in his company, more eligible, than life led out of it •, let us alfo go ; J0*" »• 1
thai we may die with bim (fays even the diftruftful Thomas to his fellow-difciples.)
But, Lindamor, we fhall there lee the Son of God, not in that form of a fervant, nil. u. j.
which he put on that he might fuffer for us, and exercife his pricftly and prophetic
function here below ; but in that regal ftate and condition, which belongs to him by
virtue of his kingly office ; on whofe lcore he is ftyled in the fcripturc, King of Kings, ^• xi*t
and Lord of Lords, all power or authority being (as himfelf foeaks) given him both
'
in heaven and in earth. And how nobly attended may we Uippofe this divine mo- l8
*'' "T"'*
narch to be in his exalted condition in heaven, when in his ftate of humiliation on
earth, whilft he was in the wildernefs among tie wild beafts, the angels arc recorded to Mit- «• »j.
have miniftred unto bim and whilft he lay Iwathed in a homely manger, the multitude Luke
of the celcftial holt were heard to folemnize his miraculous birth, according to that
paffage of the writer to the Hebrews, when be bringeth in the firjl begotten into the Htb-
'• fc
world (he faith) and let all the angels of God worjbip bim ! And yet fuch confidcrable
and noble creatures thofe immaterial intelligences, called angels, are, that one of
them in one night was able to deftroy above a hundred and fourfcore thoufand men
in the blafphemous Senacberib's impious camp. And fo much majefty and fuperio- tn^fe
rity does their nature give them in reference even to the eminenteft of mortals, that Ji*
when the undaunted Jcjbua had boldly challenged one of them, that appeared to
him in the likenefs of a man, and demanded, whom he was for ; when he knew him
to be an angel (unleJs he fuppofed him to be that promifed Mcffiah, who is clfcwhere
called the angel of the covenant, as it is in the original, and in the fame text the Lord) **»>•<». i«
he alters his addrefs unto him into this fubmiflive one, What faith my Lord unto bis jo*.*, ij,
ftrvant t And even wile and holy Daniel himlelf, who was the fecond perfon of the '•
world for power, and the firft for much nobler attributes, wifdom, and underftanding,
who law io many governors of vaft provinces, and profclTors of admired magic,
inferiour to himfelf, yet confefles to the angel, that appeared to him, that he was
confounded and dilanimatn! at his prefence, and adds, How can the fervant of this my Djn 1# Iy.
Lord talk with this my Lord? We may fafely therefore expect, that we fhall then
behold our Saviour, not in thofe difguifes, which disfigured him in their eyes, that
only confidered his fuffenngs ; but in that triumphant condition, wherewith they are
now rewarded. The thorns of his (now no more galling, but adorning) crown will
appear upon that radiant head of his more glorious, than thofe of the flaming bufh,
wherein God appeared to Mofes. And we fhall not fee that defpicable form, whichLfao4.iB.ai
made the prophet fay (perfonating the generality of the Jewifh nation contemporary
with the Meflias)—he bath no form, tier Cowt&nefi, and when we /hall fee bim, there is
,f' u»-*-
no beauty that we Jbould defire. But we fhall fee him encompaffed with fo much majefty,
and fhining with fo much of his genuine fplendor and beaurj', that we fhall
defcrvedly efteem him Nepbh; the Admirable. And our ravifhed fouls fhall, by the ^ u. 6i
more attentive contemplation of him, but find more caufe to imitate the fpoufe in
Solomon's myftic epithalamium •, who having dwelt upon the beauty of the feveral
parts, that concurred to the accompiilhing the divir.e bridegroom, exclaims in an
cpiphonema, very contrary to the exprefGon lately mentioned in the prophet, he is
altogether defires, or by an Hebraifm, mcjl defirable, which our Englifh renders be is c*»t. t. io,
altogether lovely. His eyes will there appear as St. John reprefents them, of active RcT j
fire, and will into the willing breafts of the ravifhed beholders fhoot flames as pure,
as holy, and as deathlef;, as thofe fathers of the church, who believed not the angels
altogether incorporeal, may be fuppofed to have conceived the feraphims to conlift
of.
Digitized by Google
286 Seraphic Love.
of. Certainly, fincc (as the fcripture informs us) it never entered into the heart of man,
what God bath referved in heaven for tbofe that love him ; that glory can be but imperfectly
expreftcd by the bare epithet of inconceivable, with which God rewards the
meritorious fufferings and obedience of that only begotten fon of his love, for whofe
Dm. ill. 3. fake he is pleafed to confer on fo many thoufands of men unimaginable glories. He,
that vouchfafes even to many of his fcrvants a brightnefs like that of the ftars, will
m»i.;*.». furc communicate a more radiant luftre to the fun of rtgbteoufnefs, that only fon of
e '"** 3 " his, whom (to borrow infpircd expreflions) he hath made heir of all things, by whom
alfo he made the worlds : who being the brightnefs of his glory, and the exprefs image of
trh.
his perfon, aud upholding all things by the word of his power, when be had by himfelf
' purged our fins, fate down on the right hand of the majefty on high, far above all principality,
and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in
this world, but in that which is to come. Thereby exalting him not only above all
earthly princes and potentates, but even above the higheft orders of the fpirits of the
celeftial hierarchy.
&.*.»». But apprehend not, Lindamor, that this fublime exaltation of Chrift will make
him defpile the meaneft of his faints, or difdain communion with him. For, Sc.
Pbil. li. 7. Paul allures us, that he was in the form of God, when he vouchfafed to take upon
him the form of a fervant, to make us tree : and fure, he that condefcended fo far,
and ftooped fo low, to invite and to bring us to heaven, will not refufc us a gracious
reception there. In the days of his flelh he was pleafed to own Lazarus, even in the
dilhonours of the grave, and vouchfafed him in tnat defpicable condition the glorious
title of his friend ; and when he defcended the Mount of Olives, all the loud acclamations
of the glad multitude, that fang llofannabs to him, and ftrewed his way with
their palms, their veftments, and their prailes, could not divert him from deploring,
37, jj/^,, even with tears, Jerufalem's approaching fate-, and cxprcfling in the midft of his
triumphs, a concern for the very worft and ftubbornnelt of his enemies. And, left
it mould be thought, that he was thus concerned for worthlefs mortals, only whilft.
he ftiared and felt the miferies of their condition ; give me leave to obfervc to you,
Lindamzr, that immediately after his rcfurrection, whilft the fenfe of the fudden and
unexampled change of his condition was frefli upon him, and the remembrance of
the Apoftles ingratitude in deferting him, almoft as recent, he fticks not to give
thofc very difciples, thatforfook him, the glorious title (and that a more familiar one
10.
t 'ianwc him to have allowed them on earth) of his brethren; and particularly
Mirkiri! fhews himfelf folicitous for that Peter, who, in fpight of all thofe empty boafts,
wherewith he not only feemed to defy death, but Chrift's prediction too, did not only
forfakc his Mafter, but denied him. He can in heaven be fo concerned for his dif 1
Afli»a.
trcfl-c(} members here on earth, that not only he can take notice of expiring Stephen,
thorough that cloud of fatal Hones that battered down his prifon ; and can, when
Aftiix.4. Saul was perfecuting the vulgar Chriftians, cry out unto him, Saul, Saul, why perfe-
^£$5* cuteft **** mt ' as ^ nc' an^ tno,
"
c tnat l°ve n'm> wcrc *>ut one » but in the mclTages
<kif,«t»f he fends to the Angels or governors of the feven churches, he fufficiently manifclls,
i'ypf«.
P<** thatfingle Chriftians may be as particularly in his thoughts, as if they had no other
objecT : his greatnefs will not make his kindnefs lefs familiar, but only more obliging ,
r«t. iu. he difdains not, even after his afccnfion, to fay, Behold, 1ftand at the door and knock*
if any man bear my voice, and open the door, 1 will come in to him, and will fup with him »
and he with me. That king, in the parable, by whom himlelf is reprcfentcd, is
Mitt. xxr. pleafed himfelf to welcome each individual trufty fervant with a peculiar Euge, bone
ferve. And in another parable he fcruplcs not to reprefent the great condelccnfjons
and
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 287
and familiarity, wherewith the Lord (hall remunerate the faithful and watchful fervant,
by telling his difciples, BUJfed are tbofefervants, whom the Lord, when be cometb, L«l««a.
fhallfind fo watching. Verity I fay unto you, that be jhall gird himfejf, and will make v'
tbem to fit down to meat, and will come fortb to ferve tbem. At which expreflion you
will the lei's admire, if you confldcr, that befides that it is parabolical, and probably
hyperbolical, and therefore not to be taken (as the French fpeak, aupied de laltttre)
in a ftric~c fenfej we find in the evangelical itory, that our Saviour difdained not to
converfe familiarly with publicans and finners, nor even to walh the feet of his own
difciples. And finee he condefcended to fuch familiarity to thofe frail mortals, fo
many of whom were apt to turn the favours of God into wantonnefs, we may the
lefs admire at his gracious condefcenfions to thofe, the finleffnefs of whofe condition
will keep them from turning his vouchfafements into any thing, but occafions of joy
and gratitude. Marvel not, Lindamor, as at an impertinency, that I appear fo folicitous
to poffefs you with high apprehenfions of the fupercminent dignity and felicity
of our exalted Saviour ; and that in the loftieft and moll magnificent expreffions, the
fcripture affords me, I have endeavoured to make out to you, that the bright fun of
righteoufnefs is now grown uncapable of fuffering eclipfes, but mines with unclouded
and unequalled fplendor ; and that we (hall in heaven (as the writer to the Hebrews
fpeaks) feejefus, who was made a little (or for a Ihort while, Pf*xu T0 lower than Hcb.u. 9.
angels, for the fuffering of death, crowned with glory, and honour. For it will make
heaven more heavenly to us, to find him reigning there, who hath fuffered fo much
for us ; and for whom, if we ever come thither, we fhall have fo much fuffered. For,
fince our love will, as the reft of our furviving graces, be perfected and grow complcat
in heaven ; the ineffable happinefs of our dear Redeemer mull needs bring an
increafe to ours, commenfurate to the ardency of our love for him, and we fliall relifh
no happinefs more than that, which is therefore ours, becaufe he is happy, and
fuppoics in him, what it confers on us. Bcfidcs that, fince the regal dignity, wherein
(as Mediator) he is inflated, may make us owe our falvation to his fentence, as well
as to his merits •, heaven itfclf will be ineftimably endeared to us, by our injoying it
upon his account. I need not tell you, what a value lovers are wont to fee upon the
lead favours, that can be bellowed on them by their miftreffes ; and that oftentimes
a worthlcfs ribband, a bracelet of hair, or fome fuch trifle, that nothing can make
precious but her reprefenting it, is highlier valued by the tranfported lover than the
richeft prefentsof nature, or of fortune. How great a bleffing muft it then- be, Lindamor,
to owe joys, that need not endearing circumftances to merit the name of happinefs,
to a peribn fo beloved, that even heaven itfclf will bring more felicity to the
amorous foul, as it is a proof of his love, than that it is a donative of his bounty :
as paflionate brides do incomparably more value their wedding-rings which their gladlovers
give them, as pledges, than as gold. It is faid of the pcrfccutcd and difgraced
Apoftles, that they rejoiced to have been counted worthy to fufferfhamefor his name. But Aa, T 4t#
if they defervedly rejoiced to be allowed to fuffer for him, of how much joy fhall
they have juft caufc, that are admitted to reign with him ? His having fupported
the hardlhips and the coils (for 1 muft not now call them evils) to which our afflicted
condition of mortality is expofed, does fo much alleviate them, and refrefh us under
them, that in this f.nic alio it may be truly faid, that the cbajlifement of our peace was \u. int s.
upon him, and by his hurls we are healed. But he that relieved us even by his crofs,
will fire do more for us by 1 j is crown, when he fhall admit, and even invite, each
faithful fcrvan: to no left a bleffing than to otter into his majler's joy. So rich a fource M.tt.
of happinefs did Chrift defign to nuke himfelf CO us in all his capacities and conditions, **•
that
Digitized by Google
288 Seraphic Love.
that in heaven and in earth, it was, and will be, his gracious and conftant implement
to (hare our griefs, or impart to us his joys ; and either leflcn our mifeiies by
his fuff'erings, or increafe our happinefs by 'us felicity.
Expect not, Lindamor, that I (hould foicmnly beg your pardon for this feeming
excurfion, till I come to think it a digrcflion, to infift on the blefiednefs of Chrift in
heaven, treating of the happinefs, which thofe that love him will enjoy there.
Wherefore, not to fpend time in imploring a needlefs forgivenefs, I (hall proceed to
tell you, Lindamor, that in heaven we fhall not only fee our elder brother Chrift, but
probably alfo our kindred, friends, and relations, that living here in his fear, died
Luke n, in his favour. For, fince our Saviour tells us, that the children of the refurreclion fhall
*6' fei«fly«X«, equal fa, or like the Angels \ who yet, in the vifions of Daniel and St.
John, appear to be acquainted with each other i fince, in the parable of the mherablc
Luiuni. Epicure, and the happy beggar, the father of the faithful is reprefented as knowing,
not only the perfon, and prefent condition, but the pad ftory of Lazarus : fince the
i Their, a. inftrucier of the Gentiles confidently expefts his converted and pious ThcfTalonians, to be
Da'n.
1
u. bis crown at the great day, when the having turned many to rightceufnefs, fhall, as the fcripture
foretels, confer a ftar-like and immortal brightnefs : fince (which is chiefly conlidcrable)
the knowledge of particular adlions, and, confequcntly, perfons, feems
requifitc to the attainment of that great end of God, in the day of judgment, the
manifeftation of his punitive and remunerative juftice : fince, I fay, thefc argumets,
befides divers others, are afforded us by the lcripture, we may fafely conclude it
probable, that we (hall know each other in a place, where, fince nothing requillte to
happinefs can be wanting, wc may well fuppofc (at leaft, if wc can imagine here,
what we fhall think there) that we fhall not want fo great a fatisfaftion, as that of
being knowingly happy, in our other-felves, our friends. Nor is this only probable,
Lindamor, but it is not improbable, that thofe friends, that know us in heaven, fhall
welcome us thither. For, fince Chrift allures us, that the very angels (though they
be fo far from being related to our perfons, that they are foreigners to our very
L«kc xr. nature) receive acccflion of joy for a relenting finner, that by repentance begins to
7- turn towards God •, you will think it abfurd, that in a place where charity fhall not
rwi rig, on'y continue (as St. Paul fpeaks) but grow perfect, our dear friends fliould rejoice
»• to fee us, not only begin to turn towards God, but come home to him. Nor is it
unlikely, that our tranfported fouls fhall mutually congratulate each other, their
having now fully efcaped the numerous rocks, and Ihelves, and quickfands, and
threatening ftorms, and no lefs dangerous calms, through which they are at length
arrived at that peaceful haven, where innocence and delight (which are here fo feldom
matched) are infeparable companions, both of each other, and each bleffed refident.
With thofe friends we here lamented, we (hall there rejoice. And it will be but
need, that the difcovery of each other's virtues Ihould bring us to a mutual knowledge
of our perfons ; for otherwile, we fhall be fo changed, that we fhould never
know our friends ; and fhould fcarce know ourfelves, were not an eminent increaie
of knowledge a part of that happy change. For thofe departed friends, whom at
our laft feparation wc faw disfigured by all the ghaftly horrors of death, wc fhall then
PML iii. fee affifting about the majeftick throne of Chrift, with their once vile bodies transfigured
into the likenefs of his glorious body; mingling their glad acclamations with the
hallelujahs of thrones, principalities, and powers, and the moft dignified favourites of
the eclcftial court. I need not tell you, Lindamor, that we fhall be more jiiftly
tranfported at this meeting, than was good old Jacob at that of his lbn Jcfepb, whom
having long mourned for dead and loft, he found not only alive, but a great favou-
Digitized by GoogI
Seraphic Love. 289
rite, ready to welcome him to an unknown court. For, whereas the patriarch faid
to his Ton, Now let me diey Jince I have feen tby face i the feeing of our friends in hea- °*B - ^rl
ven will aflure us, that we fliall for ever live with them there. The re-union of 3 °'
friends being there as privileged from divorce, as that of foul and body, (which
fcarce will be more ftridt and latisfactory.) For, here indeed, if our friends do not
allay our love or affection by unwelcome actions, or their contagious fuflerings, we
commonly doat on them to a degree, that, as it were, reduces God to deprive us
early of them, and fnatch our idols, and his rivals, from us. But there, our, on
both fides, coinpleated graces will not only deferve, but allow a higher ftrain of
friendlhip. The near contemplation and fruition of the infinitely tranfeendent perfections
of the Creator, keeping all our kindnefs to the creatures not only fubordinate
to the love we owe to God, but grounded on it ; as excited needles, when they ftick
fafteft to each other, owe their union to their having both been touched by the badftone
; to which they have therefore both of them ftronger inclinations, than either to
the other.
There, probably, we (hall fatisfactorily underftand thole deep and obfeure myf- s'fl-**>
teries of religion, which the profoundeft clerks, that love not to flatter themfelves,
acknowledge they are unable fully to comprehend ; being, after all the toil and induftry
of their anxious enquiries reduced to fit down with the Apoftle's u Ba'Jcr, in Rom.>;.
admiration of that depth, wnofe bottom they cannot fathom. There we lhall under- Hftand
thofe obfeure paflages of (that divine book, and uncapablc of flattery) the
fcripture, which, notwithstanding all that bold criticks, and learned expofitors, have
attempted to illuftrate it, docs ftill continue, in many places, obfeure. There, decerning
how exquifitely the feveral parts of fcripture arc fitted to the feveral times, pcrfons
and occurrences, wherein their all-forcfeeing author intended molt to ufc them ;
we lhall difcern not only a reconcileablencfs, but a friendlhip, anil perfect harmony,
betwixt thole texts, that here feem molt at variance ; and fliall difcovcr not only the
fenfc of the pbfeurer paflages, but the requilitenefs of their having been written lb
obfcurely. That Arrange and peculiar, as well as othcrwife cryptical method and
ftyle of fcripture, which often cofls us fo much ftudy to find it rational, we fliall there
difcover to be admirable, and worthy of its omnifcient author. There, I hope, w»
fliall have clearly expounded to us thofe riddles of providence, which have, but too
often tempted, even good men, to quellion God's conduit in the government of the
woild; whilft: the calamities and pcrlecutions of virtue, and innocence, feem approved
by him, who accumulates profperities on their criminal oppofers. There we
lhall be convinced, that all thefc fecming irregularities, which the heathen thought
fit to impute to the giddy whimfics of a blind female deity, are not only conhllcnt
with God's jultice and goodnefs, but are productions of it. And though fuch a
belief do here, to intelligent pcrlons, feem perhaps a greater piece of fclf-dcni.il, than
to refrain from wire, or gold, or rr.iflrelfes •, yet in heaven it will appear as rtafonable,
as here we find it difficult. For, as Bildad fpcaks in "job, We are ltd of
yejierday, and knew nothings becauje our days upon earth are hit a Jkadcw. And itc
Ihortncfs of our tranfitory lives not permitting us to continue long enough fpectators
here, to fee above a fcene or two at moft of that great play, acted by mankind Upcn
the itage of the world; it is no wonder we are apt to harbour finitkr thoughts cl tJ.c
contriver of a plot, whofe neither Leg nning nor end we arc acquainted with: which
yet is little lels injurious, than it wire to cenfure the lofty tragedian Seneca, or fome
othe r match Jc fs artilt, having perilled but a piece of fome tragedy, w hereof the latter
part never arrived at our view. But, when once God's whole plot (if I may fo
fpeak) and conduit in the adminillration of the world fliall come to be dilcloled ; all
Vot. I. P p thofe
Digitized by Google
290 Seraphic Love.
thofc revolutions and occurrences of empires, ftates, families, and particular perfons,
which men are here fo prone to quarrel with, will there appear fo juft, fo requifite,
and fo feafonablc, that thofc very things, which here tempted us to deny God, (hall
there engage us to praife him , and we ihall not fo properly be fatisfied with his
providence, as ravifhed. But efpecially, we Ihall be tranfportcd with wonder and
gratitude, when God fhall vouchfafe to difcover to his particular fervants, the reafons
of his difpenfations towards them, and make out to them not only the neceffity and
juftice, but even mercifulnefs of thofc very afflictions, that were moft imputed to his
fcverity, (no ftroke from God's paternal hand, either lighting fooner, or falling
heavier, or flaying longer, than the occafion, that extorted it, exacted) and convince
them, that their hopes were never difappointed, but to fecure their tide to better
things than thole they hoped for , nor their inferior interefts prejudiced, but for the
advantage of their fupreme ones. Yes, all that unwelcome darknefs, that here furrounded
our purblind underftandings, will vanifh at the dawning of that bright, and
• Pit. iii. (as St. Peter's * expreflion may be interpreted) eternal day •, wherein the refolution
of all thofc difficulties, which here exercifcd (and perhaps diftreiled) our faith, Ihall
be granted us to reward it. And I muft profefs to you, Lindamor, (as unfalhionable
as fuch a profeflion may fccm to a gentleman not yet two and twenty) that 1 find the
lhidy of thofc excellent themes, God's word, and his providence, fo difficult, and
yet fo plcafing and inviting, that could heaven afford me no greater blefling, than a
clear account of the abftrufe myfteries of divinity and providence, I fhould value the
having my underftanding gratified and enriched with truths of fo noble and precious
a nature, enough to court heaven at the rate of renouncing for it all thofc unmanly
fcnfualities and trifling vanities, for which inconfiderate mortals arc wont to forfeit
the interefl their Saviour fo dearly bought them in it.
5t«. »5. Nor fhall we only converfc with faints and angels, but with that infinitely more
glorious Deity, that made them what they arc, without at all impoverifhing himfelf.
In heaven, we fhall enjoy (its maker) God, and fee kirn as be is, who (as the fcrip-
, joh„ cure tcllcch us) fhall then be all in all\ comprifing all the goods, we value in the
i ty xcrcaturcs
» as eminently and fully, as the fun doth the light, that twinklcth in the
,j.
' ftars.
^mms*. Ip one, that was none of the leaft of the philofophers, fcrupled not to tell the man,
that afketh him, what he was born for, that it was to contemplate the fun •, if our
be ft naturalifts themfelves, though the darknefs, that is here caft upon things, and
the dimnefs of our intellectual eyes, (which I remember Ariftotle fitly compares to
thofc of an owl at noon-day) permit us to difcern but very little of that wildom,
power, and goodnefs, which he has exprefled in the creation \ are yet often transported
and ravifhed with a juft admiration of the perfections he has difplaycd in his
workmanfhip : if the wife queen, that came fo far to vifit Solomon* was put almoft
into an extafy, by the fight of his (though wife, yet human) ordering of things : and
i r«u L if the angels themfelves (as St. Peter informs us) defire to look into the myfterious contrivances
of Cod, in order to man's redemption : how great a fatisfaction, Lindamory
may we juftly conceive it muft needs be, to be admitted to fee fo much of God, as
heaven will difcover to us ? efpecially, fince fo much of our future happinefs will
i John confift in that beatific vifion, (as fchoolmen juftly call it) that St. John concluded,
diat we fhall be like God, becaufc wefhallfee him as he is. And our Saviour himfelf
M«t. t. *. paraphrafes our celeftial felicity by this blcflcd vifion, where he fays, Bltffed are the
pure in heart for they fhall fee God: As on the other fide, the writer to the Hebrews
employs the being denied the fight of that divine object, as a defcription of extreme
wretchedncfa* in that text, where, having exhorted thofc, to whom he writes, to
follow
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love. 291
follow peace and bolinefsy he adds, as the formidableft menace which he could make ha,
ufe of, to deter them from flighting his exhortation, without which, no man Jhallfee
the Lord. And by this vifion our Saviour feems to defcribe the happinefs even of
angels ; where, forbidding the fcandalizing of any of thole little ones that believe in
him, he adds, to enforce what he had faid, that their angels do always fee theface of his *«*• »«».
Father in heaven. We lhall be fo taken up with the contemplation and fruition of '**
that glorious object, (in whofe infinity all goods arc included and dilated) that ages,
numberlels as the joys that beatific vifion abounds with, will fcarce afford us leilure
for a diverfion to any other pleafures, than thofe itfelf creates. Which are fo
numerous and fo entire, that we lhall there defire nothing that we have nor, except
more tongues to fmg more praiies to him, or at leaft a capacity to pay him greater
thanks for what we have. And even thofe defircs, God's gracious acceptation will
make, in being conceived, accomplifhed : for, otherwife heaven's refidents fcarce
know any other want, than that of need to wifti ; the compleat bleffednets of their
condition reducing them to a happy ufeleflhefs of withes, by affording them a full
prepoffeflion of all the objects of defire. There time, like fire, having deftroyed
whatever it could prey on, lhall, at laft, die itfelf, and (hall go out into eternity.
WThofe nature is luch, that though our joys, after fome centuries of years, may
feem to^ have grown elder, by having been enjoyed fo many ages, yet will they really
Itill continue new, not only upon the fcores of their welcomenefs and frclhnefs, but
by their perpetually equal (becaufe infinite) diftance from a period. There our felicity
(hall always be the fame, yet ever new. Wearinefs arguing imperfection, either
in the object or the appetite ; the former of which is impofiible in God, and the
latter lhall ceafc in heaven. Where our felicity fhall be fo great, that variety itfelf
lhall not be needed as a part of it. And, if heaven do admit variety, it may be
fuppofed fuch a one, as lhall confift in a further knowledge of the firft object (God)
not a forfaking of it •, and fuch as ariles from the fixed beholding of the changing
necks of doves, or fuch as we may fee in the diverfified refractions of the lame
fparkling diamond. In God there is (if I may fo fpeak) fuch a various identity,
that the fruition of him both fatisfies and creates defires : though that, without
fatiety i and this, without difqutet. Other delights, like the ufual clothes we wear,
quickly grow ftale, and are loon worn out ; whereas celcftial pleafures participate
the prerogative of the Jews garments in the wildernci's, of not impairing by being
uled long. But as the amorous needle, once joined unto the loadftone, would never, Dmfc ttb,
uncompelled, forfake the inchanting mineral •, but, after ages, cling no lefs clofely s "
to it than the firft moment of their union : fo do the flints in heaven, with the fame
undiminifiied frclhnefs, ever poffefs their joys, as if each moment were the firft
that they poffeffed them in. And, if their happinefs does not improve by laftinger
enjoyment, it is becaufe it was firft uncapable of increale. Or, if our pleafures do
admit acceflion, they lhall receive it from our affurance, that we lhall tafte them for
ever, and perpetually repeat (or rather continue) the fame renewed fruitions to an
eternity, endeared by nothing more than by the quiet leifure it will afford us,
undiftra&edly to employ it, in celebrating of the author's praifes and in a condition,
happier in that by it we grow paft doing, than by paft fuffering ill. In heaven (in a
word) our inexhaufted joys will be fo numberlefs, and fo immenfe, that we lhall need
(as well as have) eternity itfelf to tafte them fully.
But, Lindamor^ it was not my defign to give you a particular topography of this $ a, is.
celeftial Canaan ; but only in a few words to let you fee, that it is a land flowing with
milk and honey. And though I acknowledge, I have given you but dark defcriptions
(and fometimcs rather poetical than chorographical) of what the apoftle ftyks the
P p 2 inbe-
Digitized by Google
292 Seraphic Love.
cel. i. it. inheritance of the" faints in light : yet fince, to whet our longings for fruitivc (or experimental)
knowledge, it is referved among the prerogatives of being in heaven, to
know how happy we (hall be, when there ; and fince, what the fcripture hath revealed
of paradifc, feems meant rather to quicken our obedience, than fatisfy our curiofity ;
I may, for thofe purpofes, have perhaps tolerably performed that talk (of heavenly
topography) by the acknowledgments of my difability to do it worthily. I (hall now
only add this property of our expected bliis, that the vaft multitude of partners does
detract nothing from each private fhare, nor does the publicknefs of it leflen propriety
in it. This ocean of felicity being fo fhorelefs, and lb bottomlefs, that all
the faints and angels cannot cxhauft it ; it being as impoffible for an aggregate of
finites to comprehend or exhault one infinite, as it is for the greateft number of
mathematick points to amount to, or conftitute a body. Our neighbour-regions do
all enjoy the benefit of light as well as we •, yet we enjoy not lefs, than if they enjoyed
none. Indeed there is this difference between the fun of righteoufnefs and that of
heaven ; that, whereas the latter, by his prcfence, eclipfes all the planets, (his attendants
j) the former, though radiant with a much brighter fplendor, will, by his
col. ia. 4. prefence, impart to his faints, according to that of the Apoftle ; When Chrijl, ivho is
our life, jball appear; then pall we alfo appear uilh him in glery. So that the elect, in
relation to this fun, fhall not be like ftars, which his fhining obfeurcs and makes to
difappeari but, like polifhed filvcr, or well glazed arms, or thofe vafter balls of
burnifhed brafs, the tops of churches are fometimcs adorned with, which fhine not
till they be fhined upon, and derive their glittering brightnefs, and all the dazling
fire that environs and illuftrates them, from their being expofed (unfkreened) to the
C4pt. »i. fun's refulgent beams. / am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine, fays every faint
3- (with the fpoufe in the Canticles) to his Redeemer. David fays of them that put
rr»i. xnvi. their truft in God, That he fhall abundantly fatisfy them with the fatnefs of his houfe,
6- and make them drink of the river of lis pleafures
:"
as if he meant to infinuate, that, as
when a multitude of pcrfons drink of the fame river, none of them is able to exhauft
it, and yet each of them may have the full liberty of drinking as much as he can, or
as much as he could, though none but himfelf fhould be allowed to drink of it ; fo,
whoioever enjoys God, enjoys him wholly, or at leaft doth enjoy him fo entirely, in
relation to that man's capacity, that the fruition of whatfoevcr rcfts unenjoyed of
God is forbidden by the immenfity of the object, and not the prepoficflion of his
rivals. The angels, though of a nature differing from ours, and thereby placed
above the pe-rfcnal experience of our fufierings and infirmities, do yet fo fympathife
with us, that (as our Saviour informs us) they rejoice at the repentance of a finner.
Lukei». 7. And, though the members of the Church militant, and thofe of the triumphant, live
as far afunder as heaven is from earth, and are not more diftant as to place, than
Erb.ii . 1 j. differing r.s to condition ; yet St. Paul reckons all the faints to be but one family in
heaven at:J in earth. If then the disparity of refidenccs, of qualities, and of conditions,
cannot now hinder the lovers of God from being fo concerned in one another*,
how much of endearing kindnefs may we luppofe, that they will interchange, when
both their love fhall be perfected, and all thofe other graces too that are proper to
cherifh and inrreale it? For the fame Apoitle, who, to aflift us to conceive the
ftrietnefs of the union both betwixt (Thrift and his faints, and the faints among them-
1 Cor. fclvcs, tells us, that be is the bead, and they ere bis body, and members in particular
'rl'r. is. teaches us to make this inference, that (to exprefs his doclrine in his own words) If
one member fujfer, all the members fufer with it ; and if one member be honoured, all the
members rejc.ee with it. Yes, Lindamor, in that blefled condition, our wills being
perfectly conformed unto our Maker's, no faint nor angel can enjoy his love without
pofleffing
Digitized by Google
Seraphic Love.
poftefling a proportionate degree of ours. And then, fince perfect friendlhip appropriates
to each friend the croffes and profpericies of the other, (as good BarziUai
could not be highlier obliged by David., than by the king's kindnefs to his fon) each* s«m.
feveral beatitude in heaven (hall (in fome fort concern the whole Jbciety, and) be , '",
ours : as aftronomcrs teach us, that the earth receives addition of light by the fun's
beams beftowed upon the liars, and from the moon reflecting upon her. And becaufe
ourperfonal capacities are too narrow to contain all that joy, we are (by the ftrange
arithmetick or friendlhip) in a manner multiplied into as many happy perfons, as
there are faints and angels blclfed in heaven. Our perfect union to our common head,
and mutual communion with each other, applying and bringing home every felicity
of theirs to us : this friendly reciprocal fympathy teaching us each glorified faint's
blclTednefs, and him ours, by a blefled circulation, which makes us incrcafe, by our
refenting them, thole joys (of others) whofe increafe we relent.
But my thoughts are engaged in fo good a company, IJndamar, that they keep
me from confidcring how faft the hours pals, and ha\e almolt made me forget, that
the time, which my occafions allowed me for fcribbling to you, is fo far fpent, that
not now at laft to reprieve you from the perfecution of my blunt pen, were to be almoft
as injurious to my own affairs, as to your patience. Herealter yet I may poffibly
make you fome amends for this, witli riper difcourfes of the nature and duties,
or (if you will) the properties and returns of this love, to which I have hitherto prefented
you fome motives. To (the lalt of) which 1 might add, that, our love to
the creatures is an earneft, but to God it is a title •, the one makes us the objects,
but the other makes the object ours : that, fince there is in love lb ftrange a magick,
as to transform the lover into the object loved ; we ought to be extremely careful of
(he dedication of a paflion, which, as it is placed, muft cither dignify our nature, or
degrade it : and not to addrefs any lower (or, which is all one, to any other) object,
the higheil intenftty of a love, which cannot (loop without our degradation. And
thefc I might expatiate on, and recruit them with many other motives, additional to
thofc I have already infilled on •, but that ! may more properly referve them to the
treatile of the properties of that love, whofe nature fo partakes that of its object,
that there can hardly be produced more powerful motives to it, than the conditions
ef it. Since then (as I freJhly intimated) I cannot but fear, that your tired patience,
as well as my urgent occafions (though thefc will recall me to-morrow morning to
my own weftcrn hermitage) doth at prefent fummon me to leave you : and fince I
cannot do fo in a happier place than heaven, I lhall fufpend my farewels, only to
beg you to believe, that fo noble a motive of exalting friendlhip, as the ambition of
rendering mine a fit return for yours, hath fo improved my kindnefs, that my affection,
without wronging its greatnels, could not cxprels itlelf by any lels attempt than this
of gaining you the greateft, and the moll defirable of all goods, by elevating (th2t
noble harbinger of your foul) your love to heaven : whofe joys alone are not inferior to*
thofe, which the being made inftrumental to procure them you would really create in,
My dcareft UnJamor,
Your moft faithful,
Molt affectionate, and
Moft humble Servant,.
ROBERT B 0 XL £,.
3r- 164s.
Digitized by Google
At occafional Refledim upon
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHILST the fourth edition of the foregoing treatife was upon finifhing, it
happened, that a devout and very ingenious friend of the author's having
J>refied to nave the perufal of fome occafional meditations, that lay by him, on feveral
ubjects, met, among others, with that which follows : and finding the fubicct to be
of affinity with what is rather touched than infilled on, in the 65th page of the pad
treatife, * touching men's inability to praife God worthily, and having a great deal
of partiality for the reflection, would needs have it annexed, as it was, to the newly
finifhed edition : notwithstanding the author's having too juft caufc to urge, that, befides
the imperfections, that are made neceflary by the uiblimity of the theme, fuch
occafional papers, efpecially his, are wont to have peculiar unaccuraienefies, as being
defigncd rather to entertain the writer himfclf than any other reader.
[• p»ge 169. «f the volume.]
AN
OCCASIONAL REFLECTION
U P O N A LETTER
Received in April 1661 %
Containing en account of what paffed on the Kings Coronation-day, in a littk
country town.
TNEED not, PyrocUsy after what we have been reading, tell you, that the writer
of this letter thinks, that both in what he has faid or the king, and in what he
has done to folemnife his coronation, he has behaved himfelf rarely well. For I
doubt not, but you eafily difcern by his way of writing, that he is highly fatisfied
with his performances, and expects that he (hall, if not be thanked by the king, at
leaft be mentioned in the news-book. But it will, I fear, be rcquifite to tell you, that
this honeft man is not alone of his mind ; for being his landlord's bailiff, he is efteemed
at that rate by his neighbours, and looked upon as a man very confiderable in his
parifli ; and is perhaps thought to have a right to pity moft of thofe, that do not
admire what he has now been doing. And yet you and [, who pretend not to be
courtiers, can, in his rural encomiums, and in his ill-contrived way of honouring his
prince, eafily difcovcr fo much that might have been mended, and fo much that
might be laughed at, that if the king, according to his wonted gracioufnefs, vouchfafe
this aftion his fmilcs, it mult not be in confideration of the fuitablenefs of the
performances to the occafion, but, partly as they proceed from a hearty, though illr
oprc'Vcd, k i!ty and love, and partly, as the, afford him a iubject of merriment.
And
a Letter received in April 1661. 2»
And not only the nice critics, who have feen thofe magnificent folemnitics, and heard
the eloquent panegyrics, wherewith the principal cities and afTemblies in the nation
have thought they did but part of what they ihould * and not only thofe afliduous
courtiers, who, by the honour of a nearer accefs, have opportunities (denied to
others) of difcovering thofe particularities, that may beft give a high veneration for
a great pcrfon and a great prince, to thofe, that are qualified to dtfcern and relifh
fuch things : not only thefe, I fay, will have a quite other opinion of the rural praifes,
and antique ceremonies, that were fo well liked a hundred miles from London but
this country-man hirruelf, if he were admitted to the court, and bred a while there,
would, in time, fee fo great a diftance betwixt what he has done, and what a pcrfon
better bred might have done, that he could not remember without blufhes, what he
now looks upon with triumph.
And now I muft on this occafion confcfs to you, Pyroclcs, that I have (on other
rifes) feveral rimes been revolving in my thoughts, what the angels think of thofe
praifes and defcriptions of God, that men devife (for I intend not here to fpeak of
thole the fcripture fuggefts) and wherein we are moft applauded by others, and do
oftentimes, perchance, applaud ourfelves. For thofe celcftial courtiers (if I may fo
call them) have feveral advantages to aflift them in the celebration of our common
mailer, which we poor mortals want. For firft, they are free from thofe felfifh and
inordinate affections, that too often hinder us, either from difcerning the excellency
of divers of God's attributes and ways, or from duly acknowledging it. They have
no fins to keep them from defcrying the juftncfs of what he does ; they have no ingratitude
to oppofe the fuller refcntments of his goodnefs; and they are not tempted,
not to difcern and adore his wifdom, for fear they Ihould appear culpable for repining
at his difpenlations. And indeed, their longevity allowing them the full profpeft,
from end to end, of thofe intricate tranfactions of providence, of which fliort- lived,
mortals do commonly fee but a part ; they are queftionlefs far more fatisfied with the
incomparably better contrivances they difcern in the management of human affairs,
than we are with the conduct or plots of the moft fkilfully written plays and romances.
Befides, thofe happy fpirits, of whom the fcripture tcls us, that thcyfland ui«
before God, and that they continually fee bis face, have by that privilege the blefled op- "5V b*-
portunities of difcovering in the Deity they contemplate and fcrve, many excellences,
""'*
which even they could never, but by experience have formed any thoughts of ; and
they fee in one another's folemn adorations and praifes a way of honouring the object
of them, fo much tranfeending the utmoft of what we here aim at, that their homages
to their Creator may well be fuppofed of a far nobler kind than ours. And laftly,
when 1 confider, how much lefs unworthy thoughts and exprerfions touching things
divine the fame pcrfon may have, when come to his full maturity of age and parts,
and whilft he was but a child in both •, and when I confider, how much more advantageous
conceptions of the wifdom difplaycd in the univerle, ami particularly in the
contrivance or a human body, one, that is a true philofopher, and a (kilful anatomift,
may have, in comparifon of a man illiterate, and unacquainted with diflections :
when, I fay, I confider thefe things, and compare the dim twilight of human intellects
in this life with that clear and radiant light, which the fcripture afcribes to angels
•, I cannot but think, that, having to the privilege of a much nearer accefi than,
is allowed us to contemplate God's perfections, the advantage of having incomparably,
more illuminated intellects to apprehend them with, they muft frame otherguifc con*-
ceprions of the divine attributes, and glorify the pofleflor at an otherguife rate, than
is allowed to thofe, whofe underftandings are fo dim, and whole refidcnce is fo remote
from that bkficd place, where the perfections they would extol arc moft difplayed.
Assisted-
'
Digitized by Google
^1
a 96 <dn Occafwnal Refle&ion upon
Assisted by thefc and the like advantages, PyrecUs, thofc happy fpirits may well
frame notions, and employ exprefllons in honour of their Maker, lb far tranfeending
ours, that, though the angel's goodnefs keeps them, doubtlefs, from beholding them
with contempt 5 yet, we may well think, they look upon them with fuch a kind of
pity, as that, wherewith great wits and courtiers look upon the miftakes and imperfections
of what they did and writ, when they were but fchool-boys ; and as that,
wherewith, when we (hall be admitted to the focicty of the angels, we fhall look
back upon our former felves. No, Pyrocles, to praiie God is a debt, which, though
we mould ever be paying, we mull always owe ; not only becaufe the renewed obligations
will lafl. as long as we, but becaufe, though the intire fum were poflibly to
be paid, we have no coin of the value, that would be requifite to make a payment
of that nature. It is true indeed, that fome men fay much more than others upon a
H=b. x. fubject, on which none can fay enough, and which even the fpirits of jujt men made
perfeff can hut imperfectly celebrate. It may be too, that the praifes we pay to God
procure us fome from men, and perhaps even from orators and encomiafts ; and
though I hope no man can lb far flatter himfelf, as to think he can flatter what he can
never do right to ; yet the zealoufnefs of our endeavours, and the applaufe that others
entertain them with, may perhaps tempt us to think, that, becaufe in our expreflions
we have furpafled ourfclves, we have almoft equalled our theme : as if to make our
praifes too great for any other fubject, were fumcicnt to make them great enough for
God. But alas, how widely mull we be miftaken ! fince our exprefllons, if we fpeak
fenfe, can at belt but fully reprefent our conceptions, and thofc being but the notions
of a finite creature, mu(t needs fall extremely fliort of perfections, which were not
what they are, if they were not infinite. No, when we have employed the lofiieft
hyperboles, and exhaufted all the celebrating topics and figures of rhetoric •, when
we have drefled metaphyseal abllractions in poetic raptures ; when we have ranfacked
whatever things are molt excellent among the creatures, and having defecated them,
and piled them up together, have made that heap but a rife to take our foaring flight
from ; when we have fummcd up, and left beneath our exprefllons, all that we are
here wont to acknowledge above them ; nay, when inftructed, as well as inflamed,
1 T.m. 11. anj tranfportcd by that inacceffbk light, that is inhabited by what wc adore, we fcem
railed and elevated above all that is mortal, and above ourfclves, and lay things, that
nothing elle could either infpire or merit : even then, I fay, thofc cxprcflions, which
any otnerwift applied would be hyperboles, do but expreis our devotion, not the divine
object ot it, and declare how much we honour him, rather than what he is. And
indeed, none but the poileflbrof an infinite intellect can be able to fay, what the poifeflbr
of other infinite perfections dtferves to have faid of him. And whatever zealous
(kill we praiie God with, we do far lefs honour him than injure him, if we think
our afpiringeft praifes can arrive fo far, as, I fay not to reach, but fo much as to approach
their fubject.
But, let not this inevitable impotence, Pyrocles, trouble or difcourage us. Thofc
Ber. nil. blefled fouls, that follow the lamb uahitberfotvtr be goes, do (as wc arc taught in the
*• Apocaiypfe) make it their bulinefs, and find it their happincls, to Ipend a great part
ot their eternity in extolling him, by whom they are placed in a condition, where they
can have no employrnenr, but what is holy and noble. And even here below, the
praifing of God is a work, wherein wc imitate, though we do not equal the angels
and arc buficd in the lame employment, though not with the fame (kiU. Nay, heaven
itfclf exempts not its relidents from an impotence, which belongs to creatures, not as
they are imperfect ones, but as they are creatures. Even the members of the church
triumphant do not triumph over this neceflary impotence ; their praifes may need
pardon,
3
Digitized by Google
a Letter received in April 1662. 297
pardon, even in a place where they can fin no more j and they can expect but from
GocJ's goodnefs the acceptance of thofe praifes, that are improved, as well as occafioned,
even by their being made partakers of his glory. Nay, in the prophet Ifaiab'%
,fj
" *•
extatic vifion, the Seraphim themfelves, that are introduced, as anfwering one another's
glad acclamations to God, are likewife reprefented, as covering (out of refpect
their faces with their wings. But, Pyrocles, as I was faying, this unavoidable diiability
to fay things worthy of God need not at all trouble us ; fince we pay our homages
to one, whole goodnefs our cxpreflions can as little equal, as they can his other attributes.
He that created us, will not impute it to us, that we act but as creatures
;
and fince he has declared, that where there is a wilting mind, a man is accepted accord- * Cor. »;«.
ing to what be has, and not according to what be has not ; the impotence I have been
fpeaking of, ought to bring us rather joy than trouble, fince the infinite diftaoce betwixt
us, without leflening his favourable acceptance of our praifes, fuppofes the
boundlefs perfections of him, whom thofe praifes (through his goodnefs) hcrp to give
us an intereft in i and no fon would repine at his royal father's greatnefs, how immenfe
foever, being fure, that greatnefs would not lelfen his kindnefs. For it is Ids
defirable to be able to defcribe the power and excellencies of him we have- an interdt
in, than to have an intereft in one, whofe power and goodnefs exceeds whatever we
can fay or fancy of them.
To conclude, Pyrecles, fince on the one fide God is mod truly faid in the fcripture
to be fo glorious, that be is exalted above all bleffmg and praife, and confequcntly, though Nci„ ra
J could (to ufe St. Paul's phrafe) fpeak with the tongues ofmen and angels , yet the higbtft '"-^
things I could fay of the divine perfections, mult needs be therefore far below tnem,
'
u
ou *'a'
becaufe a creature were able to fay them. And, fince on the other fide, it is of us
men, that God vouchfafes to fay, ivbofo offerclb praife, glorifietb me ; and his tranf- pw. »»>'••
cendent excellency is fo far from being inconfiftent with a rcfembling graciouinefs,
that fuch a benignity is one of the moft confpicuous parts of it : I will not forbear
to pay my praifes unto one, whofe deferving infinitely more than I can offer keeps him
not from accepting as much lefs than he deferves. But then I mull not prefume to
Jill my mouth with bis praifes, without fenDbly acknowledging, that there is not any
fubject, whereon my exprefiions can more want eloquence, than on this fubject i even
eloquence itfclf would want cxpreffions.
Digitized by Google



