This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.
https://books.google.com

%s.




BOYLE'S TREATISE,

SOME
CONSIDERATIONS
ON THE STYLE OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES
BY THE PIOUS AND LEARNED
THE HONOURABLE ROBERT BOYLE,


Rendered into modern language.
BY THE REV. P. PANTER, A. M.
CHAPLAIN OF THE BOYAL NAVY.
Wavo^tuffivt -ttpoff xraiiiav rriv iv ^ixutotrvvy. 2 Tim. 3. 16.
, 0
PRINTED FOR C. AND J. RIVINGTON, ST. PAUl/s CHURCH- YARD ;
AND EDWARDS AND SAVAGE, CASTLE-STREET, CORK.
1825.
ij.
^v
V
TO THE
RIGHT REVEREND
CHARLES, LORD BISHOP OF CLOYNE,
THIS EDITION Or
IBCD^ILIl3© ^SJiS^^a©^
ON THE STYLE Or
Wfyt HMg &crtptut*&
In Modern Language,
IS HUMBLY INSCRIBED IN DEFERENCE TO HIS JUDGMENT, AND WITH
GRATITUDE FOR HIS KINDNESS,
BY HIS OBLIGED AND FA1THFVL SERVANT,
THE EDITOR.

PREFACE.
»» »
The Treatise which I now venture to submit to
the notice of the reader, in a new edition, was not
dictated by a controversial spirit, nor has it the
merit of novelty to recommend it ; but it possesses a
claim to consideration, which will perhaps be more
willingly recognised, as containing the calm reflections
of an illustrious ornament of Religion, who was
happily distinguished by the union of deep research
and active piety. Abundantly as he has exercised
both zeal and ability, in supporting the Christian
edifice, he was not in a lower degree qualified to adorn
11 PREFACE.
the sacred profession : yet his inclination disposed
him rather " to serve the cause of religion, as
a layman of fortune, than to accept preferment
in the church." The sincerity of which avowal is
sufficiently manifested in his theological writings;
in causing the Sacred Scriptures, which he so much
venerated, to be published in several languages ;
and in establishing the celebrated lectures which
bear his name.
In other instances, the ingenious Author of this
treatise, encountered the strong holds of infidelity,
with the combined powers of genius, learning, and
magnificence :* in the essay now presented to the
* The virtue of magnificence is thus spoken of by the great philosopher:
A* 3*1 rov t>r.tyita.\orpt•Xovf ttvruvxi, fuyiXat xsu vrptxtuext • roiuulot 2a Kai
c« *fy&' «"7w y*f tttu fiiyet iewraw/ia, xott 'jta\tiyi 'r« toyai• art ri fiti*
•toy at t-Jjj* SeKRtvfj? o|i«v itT tivait rhv 51 iuxavw rov ioysu.—Aoif. Utfix. Kixvtt : A. £,
" The Boylean Lectures," it is remarked by a certain critic, " must be
allowed to be a collection of the noblest apologies for natural and revealed
religion, that the world has been at any time blessed with."
E<r fMipimm tuiiin tttu Vixiust,—Psalm 109. 6.
PREFACE. Ill
reader, ' he employs his lighter forces in bringing
the careless to reflection, or according to his own
striking phrase, " in skirmishing with profaneness."
This work was at first written to a friend, whom
the author addressed under the name of Theophilus.
It was composed at a time of life, which renders the
sentiments it contains exempt from the imputation
of being suggested by the decline of its pleasures
and enjoyments, and was published shortly after the
Restoration in 1661.
In the old copy the style is much involved, and
in part obsolete : and the familiar acquaintance the
Author had with the learned languages, has added to
the obscurities peculiar to the fashionable manner of
writing in the century before last, a Latinized diction.
To furnish this valuable treatise with language
more suitable to the taste of the modern reader, is
the humble, though I trust the useful office which
I have assumed.
IV PREFACE.
. If I have succeeded in this, my purpose is accom
plished ; and I shall not apprehend the severity of
criticism, for inviting the public attention to a work
which contains so many convincing arguments, and
so many appropriate illustrations.
To weaken the energy of the original is the ex
pected imperfection of a translation ; and as I have
translated many sentences into an entirely different
mode of expression, I cannot hope that my perfor
mance should be found wholly exempt from that
defect.
It has, however, been my aim, closely to adhere to
the Author's meaning. It may be requisite here to
notice, that I have taken the liberty to omit a long
digression or discourse on the profaneness of the
times, which is wholly distinct from the substance
of the treatise.
Whatever censure I may have rendered myself
liable to, I confidently hope to conciliate the good
PREFACE. V
will, of the pious advocate for sacred learning, by a
seasonable effort to recommend the study of the
Scriptures, which in the present times are circulated
with so much zeal. And to merit the thanks of the
reader, for laying before him these pages, which he
will find well calculated to entertain, and to win the
mind to a just estimation of the Inspired Volume.*
THE EDITOR.
Jtt?.jH.£. gcmiramw,
June, 1825.
*'Ei ft.it kxXSt 'i*emnt xxi tutixlur rn tfinfcgei, toVJj kki aofo 'tiViXw, *« k
•.jjo.ur *ii f&sTpwf, rltih 101*7" «» fM.— 2 Mace. 15. 38.

CONTENTS.
.Introduction 9
The First General Consideration.—On the imperfections of a Translation 15
The Second General Consideration.—On the distinction between what )
> 24
Scripture asserts, and what is recorded in Scripture )
The Third General Consideration.—On diversity of composition in 1
the Sacred Writings I
The First Objection.—On the obscurity of Scripture, 40
The Second Objection.—On the method of the Scriptures 63
The Third Objection.—On the coherence and discursiveness of the I
Scriptures, }
The Fourth Objection.—On the propriety or appositeness of Scripture i
• f 88
Texts i
The Fifth Objection.— Nothing contained in Scripture is either trivial 1
or impertinent )
The Sixth Objection.—On the consistency of Scripture 104
The Seventh Objection.—On the fruitfulness or utility of the Scriptures 112
The Eighth and Last Objection.— On the ornaments of Scripture...... 159

CONSIDERATIONS,
mtvobuttion.
Other pursuits being hastened to a con
clusion, leisure is now afforded me, dear
Theophilus, to comply with your request, in
committing to paper my thoughts on the style
of the Holy Scriptures : a subject which will
both require and justify the appropriation of
some time and much attention. For it cannot
be denied, that many persons not deficient in
understanding are accustomed to take excep
tions at the style of Scripture, while they
freely admit its divine authority ; whose
cavils, as they derive influence from their
reputation, have diverted not a few from the
study, perhaps even from the perusal of the
Sacred Writings ; giving rise to the twofold
B
10
consequence, of creating in their minds pre
judice and disrespect, as to what ought to
be held in veneration, and of depriving the
Sacred Volume of the best means of jus
tifying itself, as well as of rectifying opinions
thus unjustly biassed. What could be more
injurious to a book, which to be highly es
teemed requires but to be understood ! To
criminate, and thereby to deter others from
perusing it, is like the rashness of Saul,
whose adjuration prevented his exhausted
soldiers from taking refreshment, grateful to
the palate, and strengthening to the eyes.—
1 Sam. 14.
The allegations that are made against the
compositions of the sacred penmen, are vari
ous ; in considering the style of the Scriptures
therefore, it will be requisite to extend our
inquiry to what is comprehended in the larger
acceptation of the term style, wherein it
imports, not only the phraseology, the tropes
and figures made use of by a writer, but his
mode of arrangement ; his tone of writing, as
elevated or more depressed ; his language, as
pathetic or languid; his diction, as close or
incoherent ; in a word, his whole manner of
expression : although in the strict acceptation
of the term, an author's style implies merely
the choice and disposition of his words.
11
In giving this treatise the appellation of an
essay, you are led, I presume, to expect
some loose observations, rather than a me
thodical discourse; particularly, since the
nature of your request, as well as that of my
own design, obliges me to interweave some
other remarks with those that more directly
regard the style of Scripture. A theme so
comprehensive, however, as to vindicate, I
trust, in your opinion, a copious discussion ;
notwithstanding the urgency of other topics,
and the obligation I feel to neglect no oppor
tunity that can discreetly be taken, of com
mending to your application, and of raising
in your esteem a book, which there is no
danger vou can study too much, or esteem
too highly.
A common saying is attributed to the
ancients, to this effect—that Jupiter, though
chief in power, could not gain universal
approbation : but the objections I meet with
against the Scriptures are a mournful evidence
that the true God himself is not free from the
aspersions of his presumptuous creatures, who
arrogantly venture to quarrel with his revela
tions, as well as with his providence ; and we
have to grieve, that men are to be found who
express no more reverence for what He hath
dictated, than for what he hath dispensed.
12
It does not fall within the scope of my
present design to advert to the attacks of the
atheist, and of the opposer of revelation,
against the truth and the authority of the
Scriptures : their arguments are not without
their respective confutations. Those with
whom we have at present to reason, acknow
ledge both the truth and the authority of the
Scriptures, — objecting to the manner and
language only, in which the divine announce
ments are communicated. For one is pleased
to assert, that the book which contains them
is too obscure : another objects to its method :
a third affirms, that it is contradictory to
itself: some again sagaciously discover, that
associated passages are without coherence :
others, that the whole volume is destitute of
ornament : one person perceives, that the
language is in want of elevation, and cannot
affect his feelings: the next complains, that
the incidents are trivial or impertinent, and
that the narrative abounds with repetitions.
So many and so diversified, indeed, are the
faults and the imperfections which they im
pute to the Sacred Writings, that my surprise
would almost equal the deepness of my con
cern, were it not moderated by the reflection,
that in warring against mankind, and against
the more excellent part of mankind, the
13
Christian church, the interest of their subtle
adversary must be extensively promoted, by
depreciating those compositions, which, if
reverenced as universally as they are received,
would prove so destructive to his influence
and designs-
So captious, moreover, is the disposition
of mankind, that the purest and most ele
gant writer of ancient Rome was induced
to make the following declaration i— It was
Cicero himself who asserted, "that it was im
possible to escape censure unless by ceasing
to write."*
Poets and astronomers, in contemplating
the celestial lights that adorn the firmament,
have imagined among them the forms of bears
and bulls, of goats and dogs, of scorpions and
other noxious reptiles. Thus the imaginations
of some men have given birth to, I know not
what, visionary deformities ; affixing them to
those writings, ennobled by their author with
many celestial lights, adapted to guide man
kind, and discover to them the ways of truth
and blessedness.
The Holy Volume has been disparaged as
much by the cavils of objectors, as the firma
ment has been by the fancies of poets and
cosmographers. But I am quite sure you
will not be deterred by injurious imputations
* Vitaie non posse reprehensionem, nisi nihil scribendo.
14
from studying the Holy Scriptures—until the
pilot, offended by the name of the bear, shall
from the near vicinity of that constellation,
refuse to avail himself of the pole-star, to steer
his bark in her course.
From the knowledge you have of my
aversion to controversy, you may believe,
that to dispute with thecensurer of Scripture
is no part of my design, any farther than to
invalidate his objections may conduce to the
reputation of the Sacred Volume. Hence
you will not, I presume, esteem it irrelevant,
if in repelling the arguments of the objector,
I occasionally pass from the vindication of
Scripture to the celebration of its perfections :
in doing this, I shall vindicate to the Scrip
tures their claim to qualities opposed to the
imperfections imputed to them, which will
not only corroborate my direct replies, but
will perfectly fall in with my chief design,
which I now repeat, is to invite you to the
study of the Scriptures, and to raise them in
your estimation ; to effect which requires me
to combat objections no farther, than as they
seem calculated to withdraw them from your
attention and regard.
The objections to be considered have little
coherence or dependance on each other. In
treating of them, I shall therefore not hesitate
15
to adopt the desultory succession, wherein
they shall chance to occur to my thoughts,
while I am writing. Among the considerations
that I am to lay before you, there are, however,
some few of a more general nature, which
are severally applicable to more than one of
the exceptions to be combatted ; it will, in
consequence, contribute to perspicuity t«
commence with them.
%%t dftrat (ffienml flonattrmttom
ON THE UNAVOIDABLE IMPERFECTIONS OF A
TRANSLATION.
First then, it may be remarked, that those
who have been hitherto well known to our
selves, as objectors, are not versed in the
original languages, and particularly in the
Hebrew. Their opinions respecting the style
of the sacred authors, are therefore neces
sarily formed from translations. A linguist,
perhaps, alone can judge how much of its
elegance a book may lose in the perusal,
when read in a language foreign to that in
16
which it was written ; particularly, where the
two languages differ so widely in their con
struction as those of the East do from those
of the West.
This may form a subject for future discus
sion: yet, I must at present observe, that
the Holy Writings are tinder one peculiar
disadvantage, when judged of by translations,
which does not attach to other works ; and
this arises from the exclusive veneration in
which the Bible is held : as it has induced its
translators very generally to observe so reli
gious an adherence to the letter, that from
the apprehension of not rendering the sense
with sufficient accuracy, they have carelessly
sacrificed the elegance of the original.
In every other translation a good linguist is
accustomed to claim greater latitude, in ren
dering his author; and freely recedes both
from his words and his phrases, holding it
equally in view, to express his meaning and
to sustain his literary reputation.
In translating the Old Testament, on the
other hand, interpreters have not assumed
the liberty to render Hebrew phrases into
Latin or English phrases, but have presented
the Hebrew phrase in Latin or English words.
Further, they have not sufficiently under
stood, or at least considered, the various
17
significations of particles, the shades of
meaning attached to tenses in the holy lan
guage, and the points in which they do not
coincide with the same tenses in their own.
Hence it arises, that many things that in a
more skilful and free translation would not be
blemished by any semblance of imperfection,
are made to appear less coherent, or less
rational, or less considerable.
The cause of such imperfections sufficiently
pleads the excuse of the interpreters. Yet
the disadvantages to which almost all books
are liable in a translation, being accumulated
upon the peculiar disadvantages to which the
Holy Writings are exclusively subject, under
the same circumstance, cannot fail very greatly
to derogate from the elegance of their style.
To speak more particularly, one of the
two general divisions of rhetorical figures,
depends on the sound and position of the
words ; by any alteration in which, the figure
is lost, although the sense may be retained.
Thus, in our version of the Bible, and in
translations equally literal, this sort of figures,*
comprehending that termed Epanados, Antanaclasis,
and a multitude of others, are very
seldom transferred from the original. In
stances of this might be adduced, but it is
too easily understood to require examples.
* Namely, the ?%*'tuQ* Xs'?ws of the Greek rhetoricians.
18
To this observation may be added, that
certain graces appropriate to the Hebrew lan
guage, and an emphasis peculiarly bfitonging
to some expressions contained in it, cannot
fail to be impaired by any translation ; but
in those which adhere too scrupulously to
the original, such graces and elegancies of
language continue no longer perceptible.
In the portrait of a lovely countenance,
the painter may successfully delineate the
prominent features : yet, there is often some
thing of splendour and vivacity in the eyes,
to represent which the expression of the most
skilful pencil is unavailing.
Thus, in a composition of peculiar excel
lence, although an intelligent translator may
faithfully render into his own language a
great part of his original, yet some shining
passages must occur, some sparkling and
emphatic expressions, which he in vain en
deavours to represent to the life : and more
than one specific reason can be adduced, to
show that this observation applies with greater
force to the Bible and its translations, than to
other compositions.
Had the Old Testament been composed in
Arabic or Sy riac, or in some other eastern lan
guage than that in which its books were actu
ally written, the same difficulty would not have
19
attended its translation. Not because the sa
cred language is more difficult to be translated
than others, but because the variety of books
extant in other eastern languages supplies a
source from whence may be clearly ascer
tained the various significations of words and
phrases: whereas, in the holy language, theOld
Testament is the only source from whence we
can draw our information: from whose books
a complete language,* or a dictionary, can be
very imperfectly extracted —no other book
in pure Hebrew having descended to our
times. Hence there are many words, parti
cularly those of solitary occurrence,* and
many that are seldom repeated, of which, in
regard to the one, we can obtain no informa
tion, unless from the insulated passage in
which it is used ; and in regard to the other,
we can cultivate an acquaintance Avith them
only in those few texts, which in our opinion,
we clearly understand.
Hebrew is the very opposite of a copious
language ; and the words which compose it
being very limited in number, abound in
consequence with acceptations widely diffe
rent from each other. To this palpable cause
of obscurity may be added, the effect which
the numerous conquests of king David must
have had upon his language. The wisdom,
• The "AirttJ My'cm.
20
the prosperity, the fleets, and the various
communications of his son Solomon with
foreign nations; these causes, while as we
may believe they both enriched and extended
the Hebrew tongue, may with equal proba
bility have occasioned, that the same word
or phrase should in many instances possess
other significations, than have fallen under
the notice of translators, or have even come
to our knowledge.
And this observation is corroborated by
the well known circumstance, that Hebrew
words and phrases, with little variation, are
found in Chaldee, Syriac, Arabic, and other
eastern languages, possessing very different
significations from those which the modern
interpreters of the Bible have assigned to
them.
A further proof that my remark is not
without foundation consists in this ; that in the
ancient versions, Hebrew words and phrases
are frequently understood in a sense widely
varying from that in which they are now
received ; an observation which applies both
to the septuagint version, and to those which
were made about the time of our Saviour.
How this consideration applies to my chief
design, it is not difficult to discern : for hence
arises not a little probality, that many of those
21
expressions and passages which in our trans
lation appear dull, improper, or unconnected
with the context, would not have been liable
to such imperfections, had the moderns been
acquainted with all the acceptations in which
each word and phrase was received when
the books of Scripture were written, and when
the pure Hebrew flourished as a colloquial
language.
From a free and discussive access to the
knowledge of the original, a tone and strength
of phrase might have been impressed on the
translation, and an elegant and emphatic
diction might have prevailed throughout.
Examples which would illustrate the force
of the above observation, might by any one
be drawn from the phraseology of our own
language, in which words are used in a pecu
liar sense.
An attempt to render a phrase or an idio
matic expression from the English into Latin
or Greek, or even into an European language,
would be attended with an obstacle only to
be surmounted by having recourse to a totally
different mode of expression. Were it trans
lated word for word, the result to a French
or Italian reader would be inconsistent or
unintelligible ; and from an acquaintance
with the intended meaning, would convey
22
to our own apprehension, singular and ludi
crous absurdity.
And this is not the only disadvantage under
which a modern translator is placed, he is not
only restrained in his pursuit to very limited
information respecting the phraseology of
the Sacred Language, but he is in the same
condition in reference to the topography,
history, rites, opinions, factions and customs
of the ancient Hebrew nation, and of those
which bordered it; a familiar knowledge of
these circumstances respectively, would have
given, perspicuity to the translation, and in
terest to the reader.
But such a loss is quite unavoidable ; and
in perusing books of such remote antiquity
as those of the Old Testament, written by
authors who differed so much in their habits
from our own, and chiefly designed for the
use of their own countrymen, we must be
contented under that suspense, which arises
from a limited knowledge of their proverbs
and sentiments, of their manners and tradi
tions.
In the perusal of the Latin poets of Juvenal,
Persius, or Martial, authors who treat of fami
liar and secular affairs, who wrote in an
European language, and in times and coun
tries much nearer to our own ; how indispen
23
sable is it to be provided with information
respecting- the Roman government, history,
and customs, and even respecting many in
cidents relating to particular persons, times,
and places ! without which information some
of the most graceful passages in those authors
are obscure or unintelligible.
To this exigency may be attributed the
numerous notes and comments that burden
the pages of the classics, in which every
period and almost every line requires to be
illustrated to discover the genius or the
elegance of the author, to the reader's, per
ception.
Authors of a more ancient date, as Hesiod
and Musaeus, require even more elucidation.
From the absence of adequate information,
therefore, how much may we not believe is
obscured of the gracefulness of the book of
Job, of the Psalms of David, and of the
Song of Solomon ; as well as of other sacred
compositions, which treat in very numerous
passages of sublime and heavenly mysteries,
and were written in very remote regions and
ages, and amid circumstances utterly foreign
to our own observation.
24
®!>e &e*onir CKenmi aronaOreratfom
ON THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN WHAT SCRIPTURE ASSERTS
AND WHAT IS RECORDED IN SCRIPTURE.
Commending it to your own ingenuity to
suggest other arguments, which might be
abundantly furnished in support of the above
general consideration, as to the unavoidable
imperfections of a translation ; I now proceed
to lay before you my second consideration,
which is almost equally general ; it consists
in this, that a distinction should be carefully
made between what Scripture itself asserts,
and what is only recorded in Scripture.
The Holy Writings are not to be considered
as a communication exclusively from God to
man, in the same sense that the statute book
communicates the arbitrary will of the legis
lator, addressing the people in his own person
throughout.
They were written according to St. Peter's
expression, by holy men of God, who were
both excited and assisted by the inspiration
of the Holy Spirit in their composition : wri
ters who lived in different eras, and adopted
different styles of writing: occasionally intro
25
during according to usual custom, various
characters, as delivering their own sentiments
and speaking in their own persons.
. Several whole books of Scripture being
historical throughout, as the books of Joshua,
Judges, and Kings, and many others, contain
the plain narrative of events and actions.
In other books many passages are purely
historical, and in some, many sayings and ex
pressions are recorded, which if they are not
mere narratives of things done, they either
belong not to the Supreme Author of Scripture
or must be considered as actions, wherein the
sacred penmen personate others.
Hence many persons are introduced, from
whom a display of genius or of eloquence is
not to be expected ; for prophets, kings, and
jariests, are not the only persons, whose
actions and sayings are recorded ; but the
sayings of soldiers, shepherds, and women,
are also introduced, whose want of eloquence,
though not prejudicial to the faithfulness of the
record, it would be most injurious to ascribe
to the inspired authors, in whose writings the
sayings themselves did not originate.
In the colloquial passages of history, as
well as of romances, the supposed speakers
are introduced as discoursing in their own
persons, and the rules of composition, as well
26
as the general purposes of information vindi
cate to the author the liberty of composing
speeches according to his own judgment, for
those characters, who from the place they
hold in his narrative, require to be brought
more familiarly to the notice of the reader.
Thus ambassadors, orators, and generals, are
made to say that which is most suitable to
their personal characters, and official employ
ments. The dignity and harmony of the
composition is thus supported throughout.
The penmen of the Holy Writings, from
the solemnity of their subject, were confined
to stricter rules; infallibly secure from fol
lowing ciihningly-devised fables, they have
faithfully set down the sayings, as well as the
actions they record, not studying to accom
modate them to the condition of the. speaker,
but to the laws of truth.
By distinguishing what is affirmed by the
sacred writers, from what they only record,
the importance of the record will often be
admitted to justify some deviation from
smoothness in the style ; and by well apply
ing the same distinction, the more important
consequence will follow, of putting those to
silence, who allege against the Scriptures that
they teach vice, by the impious sayings and
examples that sometimes occur in them.
27
It was the assertion of an apostle, that
" they are not all Israel, that are of Israel ;"
Rom. 9, 6, so will I hazard the bold assertion,
that all is not Scripture, that is in the Scrip
tures. It must be allowed, that many wicked
persons are introduced, and Satan their perverter
is also introduced ; whose sayings the
Holy Spirit does not adopt, but registers :
Nor does Scripture affirm that what they said
was true, but testifies that it was true they said it.
Some of these cavillers I have reduced plainly
to confess, that they never had themselves read
those pieces of the Sacred Writings, at some
of whose detached passages they make excep
tions. And this entire want of information
can alone qualify my astonishment, to find
them father with so much confidence all they
hear cited from the Bible, upon the enditer of
its sacred text ; as if it were necessary to make
a history divinely inspired, that all the blasphe
mies and crimes it registers should be so too.
Although men who are unstable and un
learned may pervert the Scriptures to their
own destruction, yet " whatsoever things were
written aforetime, were written for our learn
ing."—Rom. 15, 4a
To illustrate the ways of Providence, how
the children of God are exercised by injuries
and oppression, is one among the usual reasons
28
that have been assigned for presenting wicked
persons to our notice; and for the relation of
crimes in the Sacred Writings. But as a strik
ing vindication of this practice, the argument
I would here press upon your consideration is
taken from the occasion there is, that men
should be taught what to avoid, as well as what
to imitate; as well that which should be de
clined, as what should be performed. For the
pole-star itself is not a surer guide to the de
vious sailor, than the aspect of a well marked
rock, or the sight of the warning breakers.
To be guarded against the tempter, it is
requisite to be acquainted with his modes of
agency ; and we could not derive our infor
mation through a better, or through a safer
channel, than the well-authenticated Book of
Him, who alone can discover the wiles and
fathom the " depths of Satan ;"—Rev. 2, 24,
tracing him through all his windings, and his
otherwise inextricable labyrinths, in that Vo
lume, where the ppison is accompanied with
its antidote, and where the defeat or victory of
other men, may instruct us without cost or
hazard to ourselves, in the true art of that
warfare, in the issue of which we are so deeply
concerned.
In the book of nature, chymists have ob
served, that those simples which bear the figure
29
or resemblance of a distempered part, by them
called its signature, are medicinal for that part
which they resemble. Thus in God's Book,
the vices and the moral distempers portrayed,
representing those in actual existence, become
by their deformity an antidote in the minds of
the depraved, against the vices they contem
plate in its perusal ; or, to present it you in
a more striking simile from Scripture, like
the brazen serpent in the wilderness, Num.
21,9, held forth to view, to cure the people en
dangered by the poison of those it resembled.
What can excite a more lively aversion to
vice, than the odious colours in which it is
represented in the Word of Truth 1 Deep as
the degradation is, into which vice plunges
the depraved, touched by the spear of God's
Holy Word, their moral deformity seems to sink
them below the level of humanity : branded,
however, with the names they justly merit,
of lions, wolves, foxes, and other brutes ; by
God's assistance, they prove to his more fa
voured servants as instructive beasts, as the
northern bear to the wandering pilot.
Persons of every moral character and com
plexion, led forth to observation by the Spirit
of Truth, are made to cooperate in supplying
his servants with that aliment, which nourishes
their souls to virtue. The same hand in ancient
50
times supplied his servant Elijah with suste
nance, sometimes through the instrumentality
of an angel, sometimes of a woman, sometimes
also of ravens.
The precedent of the good, the example of
the wicked, the open exposure of vice, are
made to contribute to the verification of Saint
Paul's testimony, "That all things cooperate
for good, to them that love God."—Rom. 8, 28.
W&t mix* enteral aronatirerattom
ON DIVERSITY OF COMPOSITION IN THE SACRED WRITINGS.
The third consideration I would offer in
general respecting the Sacred Writings, arises
from the diversity of their composition.
The several books are adapted to accom
plish a twofold design, first and particularly,
to instruct or to direct those to whom thev
were respectively addressed ; secondly and
generally, for the whole people of God.
Hence they are so constructed, that the ad
vantage of them should not be confined to One
age, or one people, but should be extended
to persons of all nations, ages, and sexes, of
all complexions and Conditions.
31
The wisdom as well as;the goodness of the
SupremeAuthor is graciously shown, in accom
modating them to the several temperaments,
abilities, or dispositions of men : that in what
ever frame of mind a man may be, in whatever
condition, under whatever circumstance, some
passages of Scripture may be found to apply,
with so strict an aptitude, as to indicate almost
more than casual appropriation. The lan
guage seems oftentimes to drop its diffusiveness
of application, and to address the individual—
as an angel of consolation, to whisper the
words of peace ; , or as a vindictive spirit, to
mark the displeasure of the Almighty, by an
almost audible repetition of the nervous! lan
guage of the prophet, " Thou art the mam"
Wherever he turns, he sees himself reflected
in the Sacred Mirror ; or as a bright portrait,
in whatever aspect it . is viewed, fye, beholds
the eyes of Scripture as it were fixed upon
himself. . . .
(The.se considerations .respecting the general
struc^reof the Holy Scriptures, will materi
ally aid purjnquipes,^nd assist in vindicating
a large proportion of those i .passages which
have. occasionally become ,the subject of ani
madversion; .and thjow particular light on
those, to.whicjbj Jhe five following observations
32
First, the several books that make up the
canon of Scripture, being primarily designed
for the use of those who lived in the times
when they were written, it might be expected
that each of them should contain passages
that particularly, if not exclusively, concern
persons of remote regions, and of an age most
foreign to our customs. And although, from
our want of information as to their usages,
opinions, and traditions, they might not afford
us all the instruction and satisfaction to be
derived from a composition of recent date;
yet fairly to estimate their merits, we may
consider how those individuals would have
been affected in perusing them, in whose
remembrance the incidents were hew and
familiar, and who were encompassed with
places and circumstances, which must have
brought the force of the language home to
their personal feelings.
As some parts of Scripture were designed
for past ages, so there are others among the
prophetic books, which may respect future
times, much more than our own : and as
their accomplishment can alone render them
intelligible, posterity may admire those per
fections, which we cannot discern.
There is one whole section of the Scriptures,
to which the elegancies of language would
33
be altogether inappropriate : which is that
containing an enunciation of the laws of
Moses. The only excellence to be looked
for or desired, in the four last books of the
Pentateuch, is perspicuity : for the supreme
Legislator of the world, who numbers among
his subjects the greatest kings of the earth, to
confine himself in the promulgation of His
laws, to the laws of rhetoric, would be to
derogate from His supreme and incommuni
cable Majesty.
It is not to be doubted, that there are
mysteries in the Sacred Writings, which have
not hitherto been unravelled, and there are
those (may their number daily increase) whose
elevated and comprehensive understandings
prompt them to a desire which Saint Peter
tells us the angels themselves cherish, to
explore them. In the Scriptures they have
a field for the exercise of their strongest
powers ; but that which almost eludes the
reach of deeper speculation, is too often held
lightly in vulgar esteem. To diffuse through
out the Sacred Volume, however, that exalted
sublimity, which is to be discerned in many
parts of it, would have obstructed the design
of the great and universal Father of Spirits,
who beholding from His habitation in eternity
His extensive family on earth, has accommo
elated .the larger portion of His revelations to
the mpre numerous section of the Cfourch,
which in all ages has been qomposed of the
weak and illiterate; convincing them by the
plain and familiar language adopted, that
they have not, from their humbje condition,
been overlooked or forgotten.
And yet those passages which are distin
guished by an easy simplicity of diction,
•frequently contain instruction for men of
greater acquirements. Texts abound, which
are adapted severally to every capacity, some
to the learned, some to the uninformed : and
it is even more observable, that the same
texts which yield to infants in divine learning
the milk of elementary instruction, render
frequently to the advanced scholar the solid
food of important information. As the same
. valuable and .mjld domestic animal affords
a grateful aliment to feeble infancy, and
stronger nourishment to support the strength
of manhood. He,n,ce we proceed in ;our
course, without changing the field of our
pursuit; and in advancing, are prepared ,for
greater attainments: Scripture itself fulfilling
the promise of our Lord, ";To him that hath
r shall be given/"* Profitable both to the un
learned, and the scientific, as;thefire, which
is useful,, in general to promote .warmth and
Habenti dabitur, Mark 4, 25.
for culinary purposes, assists at the same
time the skilful chymist, in drawing quintes
sences, and making extracts.
I doubt not that you, as well as myself,
have the misfortune to number among your
acquaintance some of those fastidious read
ers, who proud of their own attainments, and
esteeming every composition by the standard
of their own taste, are not satisfied, even with
a. revelation from Heaven, unless in perfect
accordance with it. Had the Bible been
written expressly for their perusal, or for
those whose taste exactly resembles their own ;
and that it ought to have been so is scarcely
less than they would venture to assert, their
censures might have been moderated : and
nothing less perhaps could place a limit to
the freedom, with which they condemn the
diversity of manner, wherein God has thought
fit to exhibit his truth, and declare his will :
their own abilities are the measure they have
set up, as the standard to which all discour
ses should be adapted, they have decided,
that all that transcends their apprehension,
is dark and unintelligible, and all that adds not
to their information, trivial and unimportant.
They cavil alike at the inspired diction, whe
ther through condescension to the weak, it is
rendered clear and perspicuous, or inviting
36
the inquiries of genius, the sublimity of the
subject throws over it a solemn shade.
The weak vision of the bat is equally averse
to the open day, and to the obscurity of the
night; and rejoices alone in the twilight,
which is both, or neither.
The skilful fowler adapts his stratagems to
the different habits of his game : attracted by
the light, the lark is taken by the day net :
the pigeon is enticed with bait : the black
bird, quickly alarmed, is pursued by the
hawk, or terrified by the lowbell: the wild
duck, delighting in the society of its own
kind, is attracted to its fate, by the cries of
the decoy fowl.
Thus, knowing that some persons are to be
wrought upon by reason, others allured by
interest; some impelled by terror, others again
enticed by example; the Supreme Author, by
an incomprehensible suppleness of wisdom,
so varied the heavenly doctrine into ratiocina
tions, mysteries, promises, threats, and exam
ples ; that under whatever circumstances the
devout reader may be placed, he will find
religion represented in that form, by which he
is most likely to be pleased and captivated.
And in His condescension to the weakness
of our understanding, God has graciously
dealt with his children, in a manner resem
m
bling the prophet's ; who shrunk himself into
the proportions of the infant, whom he sought
to revive.
I resort to comparisons as a striking me
thod of illustration ; and I am quite sure I
shall not incur your censure for introducing
them, as the use of familiar comparisons is
sanctified by their free admission into the
pages of Scripture.
In those who but for the knowledge attained
from divine revelation, would be surrounded
with inextricable darkness, what could be
more unbecoming, than to repine at the
greatness of the Divine Condescension, who
in the infinite diversity of the Scriptures, has
almost equalled the -unimaginable variety of
circumstances, in which man is placed. And
if God, who is best acquainted with the frame
and construction of men's spirits, has been
•pleased to speak to them severally in appro
priate languague, I feel that it is not for me
to cavil at the Holy Writings, for vouchsaf
ing to lisp mysteries to those persons, who
would be deterred from receiving them by
any other mode of expression; nor to object
to the great author of them, because He has
qualified His instruments according to the dis
positions He has designed them to influence ;
a line of conduct, which would justly incur
38
the reproof, " Is thine eye evil because I am
good T'—Luke 20, 15.
From the perusal of the three considerations
which I have gone through, you will be at no
loss to discover what it is that I pretend to, in
the present essay on the style of Scripture.
An attempt to prove that every passage of the
Sacred Volume is embellished with the orna
ments of rhetoric, would be both vain and
unnecessary. But there are two propositions,
which I hope to establish to your perfect
satisfaction.
That the Holy Scriptures were written and
approved by men assisted and inspired by
the spirit of God, is a truth, which may be
evinced by numerous arguments drawn from
Scripture itself.
If any man be persuaded by these internal
evidences, among which their style of com
position may be numbered, or if he be per
suaded by any other proofs of the divine
authority of the Holy Writings; I seek to
establish this proposition ; that such a person
ought not from their style of language to
refuse them his diligent application, or de
cline to receive them into his highest esteem.
In the other proposition which flows in
some measure from this, I maintain, that
Scripture is every where written with as much *
89
eloquence, as its divine author, in His unli
mited wisdom thought fit and expedient to
use in accomplishing His wise designs : and
further, that the Sacred Books as we at pre
sent possess them, and particularly in the
original languages, are in many passages so
far from being destitute of ornament, that
they demand a share of admiration, for what
even our western nations esteem eloquence.
For the better elucidation of the ensuing
arguments, I shall have occasion to allude to
the considerations I have now premised :
requesting therefore of you, Theophilus, to
hold them in remembrance, as well as to
bear in mind the general scope of my design,
there will be the less occasion for tedious and
ungraceful repetitions.
40
r—"
&f)e dftrat <©t)jerttotu
ON THE OBSCURITY OF SCRIPTURE.
In proceeding to the more particular excep
tions made to the Scriptures, I shall first
consider the allegation as to its obscurity:
and this is made by two descriptions of
objectors, who have different views in so
doing: the one proposing to degrade the
Sacred Writings and to bring them into
contempt; the other using their pretended
obscurity, merely as a plea for not making
them the object of their study.
Against the former, I would defend the
Bible, by representing how inevitable it is,
that many of its passages should bear the
appearance of obscurity to us ; and by show
ing the peculiar propriety there is in the
obscurity of other passages.
Many who make objections to the style of
Scripture, as I formerly observed, have no
opportunity of forming their opinion of it,
but from translations; and are unacquainted
with the light that may be thrown upon them
by a knowledge of the original languages.
A critical acquaintance with many words and
4.1
phrases is moreover denied, even to those who
have acquired a knowledge of the original ;
a great part as I before noticed of the Hebrew
and Chaldean languages having been unfor
tunately lost. The obscurity of many texts
may be accounted for from the destruction
of those writings and other monuments of
antiquity, that were cotemporary with the
books of the Old Testament; from which
circumstance, we cannot in the present age
become sufficiently acquainted with the his
tory and customs of the Jews, and of other
nations mentioned in the Scriptures ; so that
obscurity might be expected in the historical
books, as well as in the four last books of the
Pentateuch ; which might yet possess all re
quisite clearness and perspicuity, to those in
whose times they were written, and for whose
use they were principally designed.
To those who are unacquainted with the
Roman affairs, any further than they are
treated of in the writings of Lucius Florus,
his history must appear very obscure : hence
illustrations have been given of that author,
from other sources, by critics of a later date ;
these have rendered him more intelligible.
But the Roman reader, who lived about the
time of this author, required no such aid
in perusing his narrative, which as it was
D
42
perfectly familiar in respect to its allusions,
it was therefore equally perspicuous.
The great aid that might be derived from
historians or authors of remotest antiquity,
cotemporary with the penmen of the Old
Testament, were they extant, we may judge
from many passages of the New Testament,
which would be involved in equal obscurity,
were we not acquainted with the circum
stances of Herod's family, and the changes
that took place in Judaea, about the time of
our Lord.
To one unacquainted with the events record
ed by the historian Josephus, much confusion
might arise from not knowing that the whole
of Judaea, at that time, was at one period
governed by Herod the Great, who massacred
the children at Bethlehem : at another, was
governed by Pilate, and other Roman magis
trates : and was at another time divided, and
some parts of it placed under the dominion
of Herod's descendants, and that several
princes bore the name of Herod.
It may be remarkable to many readers,
that our Lord admonished his disciples, when
they should see Jerusalem encompassed with
armies,—Luke, 21, v. 21, 22,—to fly out of
Jerusalem and Judaea; and not rather to
remain in that city for security, since the
43
besieging armies would probably have op
posed the accomplishment of his advice, by
confining them within its walls. Contemplate
the admonition without reference to the actual
event of its accomplishment, and it would
appear unreasonable.
The narrative of the event removes all
obscurity from this passage : we are informed
by the historian, that for a short interval
the siege was raised. The Roman forces
under Gratus, without any assignable cause,
withdrew from the siege of Jerusalem, and
returned to it again; and under Titus, the
city was carried by an overwhelming force.
Eusebius states that the Christians of Jerusa
lem, divinely admonished, made use of the
opportunity presented to them to quit the
city, and retired to the other side of the river
Jordan. A knowledge of this event not only
discovers the reasonableness of our Saviour's
warning, but testifies to the prophetic spirit
with which it was uttered.
A complete history of the times wherein
they were written is not to be collected from
the books of the Old Testament : and it is
utterly hopeless to derive from the same source,
competent information, as to the Hebrew go
vernment either civil or ecclesiastical, or the
true state of religious sects and opinion's.
44
Texts and passages, therefore, which were
perfectly easy and familiar to those who were
contemporaneous with the sacred penmen,
must on this account to ourselves be involved
in various shades of obscurity.
Those circumstances of history which it
is no part of the sacred writers' design to
communicate, but which the reader of their
compositions is supposed to , be in possession
of, are in many instances supplied by the
moderns from the stores of, rabbinical learn
ing, from the Jewish authors who lived about
the time of our Saviour and his apostles. And
it may be reasonably expected, that higher
and valuable attainments in that kind of learn
ing, which is lightly to be esteemed, unless
as conducive to the illustration of Scripture,
will in time disperse that mist which hangs
over many other texts ; and I should not be
surprised, if many cavils should thus be
proved to be groundless, and that many a
fierce contention should be reconciled, by
bringing to light an ancient custom, or by
the accurate translation of a hitherto unknown
sentence.
I am disposed to be of opinion, that many
ceremonies prescribed in the ritual laws of
Moses were instituted in opposition to the
magical worship and superstitions of the an
43
cient Zabians. I would almost venture to
question, whether some of our most esteemed
critics have not left many Mosaical texts with
out illustration, or have not even increased
their obscurity, from not being sufficiently
acquainted with that religion. Of these
Zabians, I find a deep and general silence in
the classic writers, with the exception of
Maimonides ; an author highly esteemed by
the Rabbins, from whom our great antiquary
Mr. Selden, both in familiar discourse, and
in his excellent tract on the Syrian deities,
gave me a first intimation, which by other
information I have so far improved as to
incline me to the opinion, that a knowledge
of the rites and creed of the Zabians is very_
requisite to the illustration of the Mosaic
law.
The persuasion and practices of the Gnostics
and Carpocratians also, are so far the subjects
of allusion, that I am inclined to believe that
our ignorance of them, or neglecting the in
formation we possess concerning them, if it
do not occasion mistakes and false interpreta
tions, at least prevents us from gi vingthe clear
est interpretation of which they are capable,
to many passages of the New Testament.
In the third place, we have reason to be
lieve, that the difficulties of many texts flows
46
from this circumstance : that .they were in
tended for the use of those, who shall live in
future times, by whom they will doubtless be
better understood.
To the Jews who lived in the time of Moses,
and even at a much later period, many of
those predictions communicated both verbally
and by types, as they related to the Messiah,
seemed dark or unintelligible; which to us
are abundantly illustrated by the rising of
that Sun of Righteousness, who was then, the
unknown subject of them. The mysterious
temple and city described in Ezekiel, much
of the Apocalypse, and many other passages
of Scripture are abstruse to ourselves; yet
.they will be open to the understanding of
those, whom their completion, the best expo
sitor of dark prophecies, shall have unfolded
them.
The predictions which are made by the
Holy Spirit seem designed to accomplish a
twofold purpose : some are clearly expressed,
that those who are made acquainted with
them may, before their accomplishment, be
informed what is about to take place. Others
are proposed, not so much that those to whom
they are addressed should know the predicted
event before its accomplishment, as that the
fulfilment which expounds them, should, at
47
the same time evidence the foreknowledge of
the Divine Person who foretold it.
Our blessed Lord predicting to his disciples
their sufferings and persecutions, points out
to them also this second design of prophetic
enunciations:—" These things have I told
you, that when the time shall come ye may
remember that I told you of them."—John,
26, 4.
The fourth observation that I proposed to
make is, that a certain congruity prevails in
the darkness of some passages of the inspired
Volume, as it checks that profane curiosity
which would intrude upon sacred mysteries,
and which when comprehended, would not
be duly esteemed ; whereas the attention they,
demand is calculated to excite the speculation
and industry of elevated minds, who justly
consider the development of them a sufficient
recompense for all their exertions.
And I must here remark the gracious con
sideration of the Supreme Author of Scripture,
for the humblest of his intellectual creatures,
who has rendered whatever is absolutely ne
cessary to their salvation, easily accessible to
their understanding.
Lastly, there is much obscurity in Scripture
attached to the subject communicated, and is
not chargeable upon the language in which
48
it is- expressed. For not to advert to the
sublime veil of prophecy, which is spread
over so much of the Sacred Text; whatever
relates to eternity is difficult to be compre
hended by a finite intellect.
There are many truths that are admitted to
be attainable by the light of nature, the ideas
of which are indistinctly received by the weak
vision of the human. understanding, although
illustrated by the clearest expression. Even
in natural philosophy the reality of this is
evidenced : the nature of place and time, the
origin of motion, are subjects, which if un
derstood by himself, no writer has ever so
clearly described in language, as to divest of
all obscurity.
When Scripture, therefore, in many of its
passages treats of far greater and sublimer
mysteries, associated with the spiritual and
eternal world : the nature and the decrees of
the Supreme Being ; the Holy Trinity ; the
incarnation ; the influence of the Holy Spirit
on the soul of man, mysteries, of which human
language presents rather the shadow, than the
image ; can the Sacred Text be expected to
possess a perspicuity, which does not be
long to any means we are acquainted with
of mutual communication, or to supersede the
occasion for industry and application, where
49
our understanding is not enlightened by a
first perusal.
It gives me much concern here to remark,
that the glosses and interpretations of some
who have mistaken the nature and the degree
of their own illumination, have imparted a
deeper shade of obscurity to many places,
which they were too solicitous to lay open to
the view of mankind.
Men possessed of a strong predilection for
certain metaphysical theories, originating in
their own conception, or imbibed with the
high reverence thejT have for the authority
of others who have announced them, are
pertinacious in urging certain subtleties as
indispensable to the explication of certain
doctrines delivered in Scripture, or that such
subtleties to which they attach infinite impor
tance, are deducible from those doctrines.
Strongly under these impressions, without the
remotest apprehension of their own fallibility,
they undauntedly venture to interpret dark
texts, and even to illustrate clear ones, as not
, only to impress upon them the semblance of
perspicuity, as to their own meaning, but to
vindicate the nice speculations or adopted
theories of their expositors.
Hence many texts, which to a rational
and unprejudiced reader are not wanting in
50
perspicuity, are made to present inextricable
difficulties, under the perusal of the unguarded
or prejudiced, who are either not watchful or
not anxious to distinguish between the plain
sense of the text itself, and those metaphy
sical subtleties palmed upon it by skilful or
interested persons. And I must point your
observation to the fact, that these niceties are
frequently so groundless, that though much
ingenuity might have been required to devise
them, it demands only a moderate share of
reason to despise them; or they are so unin
telligible that any man of common reflection
might be tempted to suspect, that their in
ventors either mean not what they assert, or
understand not what they allege.
It is painfully to be regretted, that an
advantage has been given to the opposers of
some sacred mysteries of the Christian reli
gion, by the devices with which schoolmen
and other writers have perplexed many doc
trines, as that of predestination, the Trinity,
and the operation of the Holy Spirit on the
will of man : and what is even more unfortu
nate, that it has contributed to make some
men opposers, who would otherwise have been
established in the faith. And I further appre
hend, that the imaginations of the atheist have
been too much promoted by the unintelligible
conjectures, which many have fearlessly added
to the scriptural doc trines of the Eternity and
Infinity of the Supreme Being. - •.
For there are some, who indiscreetly and
unfairly involve as integral parts in the same
cord of doctrine, a revealed truth, and their
own metaphysical speculations respecting it,
though frequently destitute of proof, and per
haps of meaning also : and the scrutinizing
reader who has just sufficient understanding
to discover the futility of one part of the
doctrine, the unsoundness of one strand in
the cord, is induced to condemn the whole
for its sake.
But I fear I have been guilty of some
digression ; for it was merely my intention
to intimate that it is not what Scripture
announces, but what it is represented to
affirm, that sometimes creates obscurity :
and that in reference to other passages, in
which that charge is substantiated, as it is
the awful sublimity of what is inculcated that
makes them inevitably, abstruse, it is little
more pertinent on such ground to cavil at
the style of Scripture, than to raise captious
objections to its author, for making us but
men.
I have so far proceeded in this argument,
with the view of replying to the objectors
52
against the obscurity of Scripture : and how
far my arguments have established what I
proposed to maintain, I confidently submit
to you unprejudiced opinion : for my reason
ing has been directed against those, who
endeavour to bring the Scriptures themselves
into disrepute.
That the second claiss of objectors may
pervert my arguments to the vindication of
their neglect of Scripture, it is not difficult
to anticipate ; for they have the opportunity
of alleging, that what has been said to justify
the obscurity of Scripture, is a plain confes
sion that it is obscure.
It will therefore be requisite to reply to
those, who both towards the Scriptures, and
towards themselves, are chargeable with the
injustice of refusing to learn any thing from
the Sacred Volume, because they have no
hope of comprehending the whole of its con
tents. It is my wish to vindicate the truth,
not to distort it to my own purpose : the hea
venly firmament above us is not exclusively
composed of stars, and it has been suggested
that some may be so exceedingly remote,
that their light has not yet reached our system.
I have already made the acknowledgment,
and shall not now disown it. There may
be deep shades of obscurity in the expanse
53
of the Sacred Text, whose illustration will
recompense the assiduity, and bless the
remotest of succeeding ages. And some
mysteries perhaps aire so involved in darkness,
that to elucidate them is reserved for the illu
mination and blazes of the last universal fire.
But here it may be remarked of the texts
that are accompanied with so much difficulty,
that to understand 1them, is not of essential
importance.
As to those points that are of vital import
ance to our well being, the darkness of Scrip
ture is not less partial, than that of Egypt,
which benighted only the enemies, but in
volved not the people of God.
" If the Gospel be hidden, it is hidden to
those that are lost ; in whom the god of this
world has blinded the minds of them that
believe not." 2 Cor. 4.—3, 4, at least in re
ference to essential doctrines, the assertion
of Moses applies : " This commandment,
which I command thee this day, is not hid
den from thee, neither is it far off; but the
word is very near unto thee, in thy mouth,
and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it/'
Beut. 30 —v. 11 to 14.
The appropriate quality of the Bible is to
enlighten the understanding and to make
wise the simple : and as it is written for the
54
whole people of God, the greater part of
whom are unlearned, assertions are accom
panied with an evidence proportionate to the
degree of assent they demand ; and are so
far intelligible to the pious and diligent reader,
as to comprehend them is requisite to his
happiness.
It is our duty to study the Scriptures, but
it is never our duty to understand what is
beyond our comprehension, to which may
with propriety be applied what I remember
a certain father says of the holy sacrament,'
that it is not to be deprived of it, but to
slight it, that will condemn men.*
As a knowledge of the most difficult passa
ges may be safely resigned, so the knowledge
of those parts of Scripture, which are neces
sary to be understood, is not difficult of
attainment: and their clearness is exactly
proportioned to their frequency of occurrence.
Yes ! there are shining passages in Scripture,
sufficient to illuminate the path to Heaven,
though some unobvious stars of that bright
sphere cannot be discerned, without the per
spective of intense reflection.
God has been pleased to furnish us with
ample sources of instruction, and we have
little reason to repine, if in that book, which
is not appropriated for our own use exclu-
» Non privatio, sed conteroptus damnat.
55
sively, he has provided also for those, who
are fitted for higher attainments ; and unless
we practice injustice towards ourselves, those
passages even which are so obscure as to teach
us nothing else, may at least teach us humility.
Nor does it derogate from the goodness or
wisdom of God, to assert, that the canonical
books are so accommodated, as to supply
every description of readers with an exercise
for their industry, and to give even the most
learned continual inducements to seek the
irradiations of His Spirit, and to depend upon
His instructions, by leaving, among many
passages that stoop to our weakness, some
that may make us sensible of it. It should
rather be esteemed as a distinguishing excel
lence than as a blemish in the Sacred Writings,
that they should send fortha stream of instruc
tion, suited to all capacities : a river, wherein
a lamb may quench his thirst, and which an
elephant cannot exhaust.
It would be the mark of an evil disposition
in a child, to be excited to anger because
strong meat was provided for his elder bro
thers, when he himself could digest no other
diet than milk. And should his envious wish
prevail, to the utter exclusion of stronger
aliment, his riper years would be deprived
of their requisite support.
56
Thus by the perusal of Scripture, when a
child in knowledge shall have attained to some
higher measure of skill, he will then rejoice in
the opportunity of exercising his understand
ing in those mysterious texts, respecting which
he formerly complained that they surpassed it.
But since Scripture with sufficient perspi
cuity instructs us in every thing requisite, and
in much more than we are in general disposed
to learn or to practise, the Christian, zealous
for his religion, would no more abstain from
partaking of this heavenly food, though all
the hard places should rem:iin unresolved,
than the children of Israel would have foreborn
to eat the Pascal Lamb, though not a
bone of it were to be broken.
But to resume the seriousness due to the sub
ject: would not that person deserve to wander
an unrelieved mendicant, who should refuse
the profit of a rich mine, because many are yet
unexplored or undiscovered, or because all
those of the Indies are not exhausted ?
But why should any one be prevented by
the obscurity of the Sacred Writings from
applying himself to the study of them ? For
study will diminish the obscurity which, like
a mist, appears thicker at a distance, than on
a nearer approach, and on passing through it
seems in some measure to dissipate.
57
Thus many a student whose piety ha$ been
rewarded through perseverance, has found
to his consolation, that what at a distance
alarmed him, was not intended to frustrate
industry, but to punish pusilanimity by with
holding the rich harvest, reserved for laudable
enterprise.*
Scripture is the best expositor of Scripture ;
and our inquiries in seeking the true inter
pretation of a difficult passage, lead to a more
familiar acquaintance with those passages
which we assume as necessary to its elucida
tion ; and so greatly facilitates our application
of them on other useful occasions, that the
fable of the dying husbandman may be not
unaptly used to illustrate the case : who told
his sons that a treasure was concealed in an
undefined place in his vineyard; which so
excited their eager exertions in digging the
ground throughout, and in turning the earth
up about the roots of the vines, that they
found the treasure, not indeed in gold, but
in the produce of their vintage.
Thus in the hope of penetrating the sense
of obscurer places, by the light of those
which are understood, a certain promptitude
in the knowledge of the clearer passages is so
far improved, that our unsuccessful researches
* Non quia difficilia sunt non audemus sed quia non audemus difficilia mm.
E
58
are abundantly recompensed by accidental
advantages ; if a greater proficiency in Scri ptural
knowledge is our design, an unsuccessful
attempt on the one hand is not unprofitable,
and on the other, to make the wished for
discovery is attended with peculiar gratifica
tion. Thus whatever the event may be, such
exertions are seldom made in vain, but attain
either their end or their recompense. And
this prompts me further to represent to you,
that Scripture is instructive, not only in com
mon with other theological writings, but
offers to our application a second field of
improvement. As it is abundantly productive
of information, so is it the instituted means
of grace: as sin came into the world by the
weakness of one man, listening to the words
of the devil ; so Divine Wisdom is pleased to
make restoring grace operate on us, in sub
mitting our better understanding to the Word
of God.
However humiliating the acknowledgement
may be, the human constitution is sick and
faint with a moral disorder; and whoever
permits himself to be led to the anxious
perusal of the Sacred Writings, adopts the
same remedy, under his spiritual disorder,
which the inhabants of Gennesarath did in
favour of their sick and weak countrymen,
59
who laid them in the way of Jesus, and con
sequently in that of recovery.—Mark 6, 56.
It is in reference to the darkest book per
haps of the Sacred Canon, that it is said ;
" blessed is he that readeth, and they that
hear the words of his prophecy."—Rev. 1, 3.
The Ethiopian, travelling in his chariot to
Jerusalem, was employed in reading the
prophet Isaiah ; and his question to Saint
Philip proves that he understood not what
he read. The Spirit of Grace descended,
and vouchsafed to reveal to him the great
mystery of human redemption ; and on the
same occasion satisfied him as to the meaning
of the prediction he was contemplating, and'
acquainted him with its recent and happy
accomplishment.
The Bible being the appointed channel
through which it has pleased God to commu
nicate the refreshing stream of Divine Grace,
as well as the healing waters of truth, presents
us at the same time with an impulse to our
exertions, and with strength to support them.
No instrument is weak in the hand of
Omnipotence; so no means should be re
garded as less likely to be ineffectual, than
those that are accompanied by Divine Grace.
We may with some confidence hope for
God's blessings on his own institutions, con
60
sistently with the promise, that if we ask any
thing according to the will of God, he hear«th
us. And it may be safely affirmed, that it
is agreeable to the will of God, to desire a
competent understanding of that Book, in
which His Will is contained. The commands
of God are a warrant to the believer's confi
dence in the expectation of power to obey
them. To search the Scriptures is a duty in
the performance of which, therefore, no
insuperable difficulty might be anticipated :
Saint Peter in theory was well acquainted
with this truth, when in order to obtain power
to walk on the sea, he solicits that our Lord
would command him to come to him on the
water.—Mat. 11, 28.
The Bible is in an eminent measure qualified
to communicate information and improve
ment in holiness : this is the highest perfection
that any volume can possess.
But the Sacred Volume is in reference to
other books, what the diamond is in regard
to gems, the most valuable, the most brilliant,
the most capable of diffusing light, possessed
at the same time of the firmest solidity, and
the best adapted to make penetrating im
pressions.
But if the Bible were as little adapted to
accomplish its design as it is the contrary, I
61
should call to my remembrance, that the Lord
of Nature commanded the unsuitable material
of clay, to illuminate the eyes of the blind. John
9, 6. And though the Holy Volume had borne
to my observation the outward appearance of
equality with other books of morality and
devotion, yet the Divine appointment would
have excited my expectation of its efficacy.
The Syrian leper indeed could scarcely divest
himself of the persuasion, that Abanar and
Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, were in every
respect equal to the river Jordan, and as likely
to be medicinal for his disease : and found
it difficult to comprehend, that God's appoint
ment could put a difference between things
that knew no other.
From the obscurities observable on the face
of Scripture, many persons who are well and
piously disposed, have to my own knowledge
declined the study of it, for that of other
religious books, which possessed no difficul
ties ; and on that account seemed to promise
a greater measure of instruction. Though
partly admitting that the ground of their
preference is tenable, I yet do not scruple to
affirm, that Scripture will afford the Christian
and the divine a larger share of light or infor
mation, than the most intelligent of human
authors,—as the moon, notwithstanding the
m
spots in her disk, pours forth a larger column
of light than the lesser luminaries, although
in them no such spots are discernible.
To bring this part of my subject to a hasty
conclusion, I must remark, that the Scriptures
possess in themselves peculiar propriety, as an
instrument for the communication of revealed
truth ; and that they are appointed by Divine
Wisdom for that purpose. The clearer pas
sages may instruct ordinary readers : the rest
may contribute either to recompense or to
humble the learned. Hence no just and suf
ficient obstacle can be assigned, to deter any
description of readers, who may enter on the
perusal with pious sentiments, from the study
of the whole.
The Word of God is termed a light ; and
it so far justifies to itself that appellation, that
the humblest peasant may, unless wilfully
blinded, direct his steps by the benefit of its
refulgence; while the gravest philosopher may
find in its pages ample exercise for his most
penetrating skill. And further, the ignorant
may there acquire every requisite information,
and the most learned may reap the substantial
advantage of discerning their ignorance.
63
W&t Sttonfc ©fcjerttotn
ON THE METHOD OF THE SCRIPTURES.
I proceed now to the second objection to the
style of Scripture, grounded in the appearance
of an incoherent method in the Sacred Writ
ings ; an objection urged by many a captious
disputant. Were it in reality destitute of any
methodical arrangement, it might be replied,
that the Book of Grace in that respect resem
bles the book of nature, wherein the luminaries
of the celestial expanse are not placed in more
regular order, than the passages of Scripture.
Or that irregularity cannot injure the beauty
of the group, where each flower is select.
That it became not the majesty of the Scrip
tures to be fettered to the laws of method,
which have been devised for the arrangement
of our own narrow views and low conceptions;
rules that would be often inappropriate and
injurious to the Divine enunciations. For
the prophet has most truly affirmed, of the
transcendent sublimity of the Supreme Mind,
that as the heavens are higher than the
earth, so are his thoughts higher than our
thoughts.—Isaiah 55, 9.
64
Or, to address my comparison to the familiar
observation of men of science, that as amber
gris and musk become more redolent from
their union, and as in compound medicines,
as mithridate or theriaca, the mixture imparts
to the electuary a higher virtue than the sepa
rate drugs possess ; so it may frequently occur
in divinity, or in morality, that a complication
of precept and example, of perspicuity and
mystery, may induce a more effective influence
than if disjoined.
We should justly consider that person frivo
lously captious, who should object to a sum
of money offered to him, merely because the
half-pence, shillings, and sixpences were not
formed into distinct heaps, but tumultuously
thrown together in one. If Scripture were in
reality as entirely without method as it has been
represented, these and many more arguments
might be used to vindicate its want of order.
But the truth is, that it possesses a certain
methodical arrangement, which although not
fastidiously exact, is both appropriate and
excellent, which is never deviated from, but
upon sufficient grounds and for some myste
rious purpose. The laws of order in Scripture
being rarely waved, but as the laws of nature
are in the material world for man's instruction.
To justify this assertion it will be sufficient to
65
estimate the excellence of the arrangement,
according to the accuracy with which it. is
adapted to the author's design, not according
to the succession of the section.
In regard to the historical dislocations,
generally speaking, a satisfactory reason can
be assigned for them wherever they occur ;
and they are for the most part accounted for
by judicious commentators and expositors.
And in reference to the frequent and long
digressions objected to in the epistles of Saint
Paul, were he a mere human writer, I should
be inclined to attribute his frequent excursions
to his copiousness on all topics, not to his
want of skill in the discussion of any one
subject : and should compare the devious
pen of the apostle to those generous horses,
which although well broke and managed,
will frequently in curvetting and prancing,
not from want of discipline, but from pure
spirit, deviate on one side or the other of the
straight line of their road.
But considering Saint Paul as an inspired
writer, I would raise my metaphor : I would
rather observe in reference to his manner as
an apostle, that as a great and majestic river
pursuing its course to the ocean, by the
interposition of rising lands is impelled to
windings and meanders that cause it some
66
times to retreat from the ocean it tends to, to
which afterwards with an augmented stream
it bends again its intermitted course, having
watered and fertilized in its passage the
grounds through which it seemed idly to
wander : so the apostle, directing his dis
course to the accomplishment of his main
design, without declining his object, but with
the view to promote it, may for a time appear
to abandon his line of argument, and deviate
widely in answer to some obvious difficulty,
or to anticipate some tacit objection, and
then more successfully resumes his former con
siderations; now strengthened by the defeat
of the interposing scruples, having in his de
vious course happily illustrated and enriched
those subjects, which his incidental excursions
led him occasionally to handle. And I must
here remark, in accordance with the ancient
proverb, that expedition will frequently justify
a circuitous route.
And here the observation is not to be spared,
that inattention to the particular manner of
writing adopted by the Holy Spirit, causes the
method of Saint Paul and others of the sacred
writers to appear to much disadvantage. For
in the historical parts of Scripture, where the
order of time is interrupted, deviations* are
frequently used for the purpose of preserving
» Particularly those which are termed w(tliit(a, *(tX*4"s ^^ 'trmUm.
67
the coherence of the subject ; and contribute
either to bring a narrative speedily to a con
clusion, or to join passages allied in some
other circumstance, though severed in that of
time. Subjects are also occasionally intro
duced, which do not seem pertinent to the
thread of the discourse, but forcibly apply in
some view within the author's design, contrir
bute to illustrate his meaning, and to light
the reader through the path of his argument.
Where the connexion appears defective, it
may sometimes be restored by rendering some
Hebrew verbs or Greek aorists in a preterpluperfect,
instead of a perfect sense ; or by some
other grammatical change of words, which
all who familiarly understand the Hebrew
language, will know to be allowable in the
propriety, of that tongue, as it does not possess
the same variety of moods and tenses, which
prevails in our western languages.
That which bears the appearance of in
consistency in a composition is sometimes
designed in reality to anticipate a miscon
struction ; and therefore must not be consi
dered as interrupting the coherence of the
composition, as it may prevent the doctrine
from being either objected to or perverted.
Where the prophets dwell on particular mer
cies promised to the children of God, or
/".
• . , 68
judgments denounced against them, they
burst forth into pathetic digressions relating
to the Messiah which appear abrupt and
incoherent to those who consider not with
how peculiar a propriety the mention of the
Messiah is combined with that of the mercies
of God, of which he is both the foundation
and pinnacle, the origin and the consumma
tion ; and with how much force allusions to
him are combined with the judgments of
God, under which He was the chief conso
lation of His people. In reference to the
mercies of God the promises made of the
Messiah taught those who faithfully believed
in him thus to reason with the Apostle. "He
that spared not His own Son but delivered
Him up for us all, how shall he not with Him
also freely give us all things."— Rom. 8, 32:
He who is called the teacher,* that Bishop of
our souls, who was in the supreme degree of
perfection what St.- Paul required in a Bishop,
both qualified and forward to instruct;! (John
13, 13. 2Pet. 11, 25. 1 Tim.S, 2.) when his
attention was particularly drawn to a word,
an expression or a topic in his own discourse,
would sometimes take occasion from that
incitement to impart further instruction, by
digressing to an intervening theme, which in
whatever manner connected with his principal
69
topic, accorded with his merciful intention,
which was to enlighten the benighted under
standings of men.
It must be admitted that there is often the
appearance both of incoherence and even of
contradiction in the inspired discourses, an
appearance which is very striking in many
of Saint Paul's Epistles, where he seems to
attach praise and blame to the same persons.
Such passages are frequently to be reconciled
with the strictest consistency from this con
sideration, that in the assemblies of men to
whom they were addressed, there was a
combination of different characters : as Noah
and Ham were together in the Ark, and the
tares and the wheat in agro domin&o, in our
Lord's parable ; so both good and bad men
were among those addressed by the inspired
authors : heretics particularly gnostics, and
orthodox christians. Their discourses are
therefore so constructed, that in the general
terms used there might be something delivered
to appeal to the consciences, and to apply to
the circumstances of both descriptions of
persons, which each individual might res
pectively appropriate to himself.
The misplacing or omission of a parenthe
sis is sometimes a cause of confusion in the
language of Scripture. For as there are no
70
parentheses in the Hebrew copies, nor as ft
is by some supposed, in the Greek, the pub
lishers of the several editions of the Bible
have placed them where they have judged
it most convenient: some have included in
them what others have omitted, some have
marked long passages as parentheses, which
others have not considered as such : and per
haps none of them have been so successful,
as to leave no room not for trivial alterations,
but for the corrections and emendations of
future critics.
The division of the Sacred Text into chap
ters and verses, although a great assistance
to the memory, and though useful in other
respects, in its present state, greatly injures
the order, and the arrangement in the New
Testament.
It is of no greater antiquity than its con
triver Stephanus, by whom it was drawn up
in haste, and was adopted into general use
on his authority. Hence it will reflect little
discredit on that illustrious promoter of hea
venly learning to say, that he has sometimes
divided that which ought to have been left
united, and united some sentences which
perspicuity requires to be divided ; nor is it
any disparagement of his useful labours to
suggest, that his successful attempt ought not
71
to lay any restraint upon other learned men,
from using the same liberty, which he assumed
in altering the former divisions.
As the punctuation more materially influ
ences the sense of the composition, it ought
to rest on the highest authority; but it is
within the sphere of learned industry to alter
the improvements of Stephanus, so as most
effectually to promote the perspicuity, and
the arrangement of the Sacred Volume.
I do not design any part of the above
remark to apply to the accentuation, or to
the divisions observed in the Old Testament,
either as to their great antiquity or their
authority : for very skilful critics have been
unable to come to any decision on this sub
ject. Adhue sub judice lis est.
The analytical works of some, I wish I
could say of many learned divines and able
expositors have sufficiently shown, that Scrip
ture may be easily reduced to a perspicuous
order: and what is more distinctly to be
remarked, that it actually does conform to
the known laws of method, where it is not
obscured by the brightness of that order,
which the Holy Spirit has adopted as effica
cious in accomplishing a higher design : in
illustration of which many passages might be
adduced, which from discovering the divine
72
author's design in the context, derive from
their position an importance scarcely to be
attached to other more brilliant passages, as
an inferior luminal, from its position in the
heavens is often at greater utility in tracing
or navigating the ocean than the moon itself.
Wbt tfl&irfr ©fjjerttom
ON THE COHERENCE AND DISCURSIVENESS OF THE
SCRIPTURES.
Allied to their objection, who cavil at the
Scriptures for their want of order, is that
which represents them as seldom coherent,
and in still fewer instances proceeding by
regular gradations, from premises to conse
quences. I have observed with concern,
that some pious readers, probably from their
desultory manner of reading, are easily led
into the mistake of considering the Bible as
merely a repository of sentences and detached
passages, where divine truths are thrown
together without arrangement; and are not
backward in applying to its composition the
censure, that Nero passed on Seneca's style
of writing, that it resembled " sand without
73
mortar," " arena sine cake." Whereas in
the perusal of the prophets and apostles, an
intelligent person may with little attention
discern, that deductions and inferences con
tinually occur in their writings : and that
their arguments, though not cast into mood
and figure, are not unfrequently as cogent and
as conclusive as a syllogizm in Bar-ba-ra.
I frequently entertain myself with the writ
ings of the apostle, and of the philosopher;
and according to my apprehension, Saint Paul
reasons with as much solidity and acuteness
as Aristotle.
The former composed his writings under
the immediate influence of the Holy Spirit,
the primary and the grand Author of the
reasoning faculty ; hence he should be as
well acquainted at least with the conduct
and development of that faculty as those who
possess it only by participation, and who
assume so glittering an appearance, illumined
by some few beams vouchsafed by that bright
Sun, who is indeed the Father of Lights, from
whom each good and perfect gift descends.
But as it now occurs to me to dwell on some
particular points, I proceed to the following
considerations. •
Some trains of reasoning existing in Scrip
ture remain undiscerned or misunderstood,
F
74
from our total want of familiarity with the
figurative or abrupt mode of arguing usual
among the eastern nations, who in their ar
guments were accustomed to leave much to
be judged of or deduced by those with whom
they communicated : and in their discourses
they were far distant from that logical exact
ness, which prevails in our European schools.
This is well known to those who are versed in
their writings. Many trains of reasoning bear
the appearance of being unconnected, from
the misconstruction of the original particles,
particularly of the Hebrew conjunction copu
lative vau or waf.*
The Hebrew particles are very generally
susceptible of various acceptations, exclusive
ly of that which first occurs to the translator.
And if in every text that signification were
skilfully and freely adopted, which would
render the best sense, I can assert with
confidenpe, that the Scriptures would be
shown to be much more coherent and argu
mentative, than translators are accustomed
to make them.
The particle vau occurs many thousand
times in the Sacred Text ; and although its
primary signification is and, it possesses, as
• For the Jews differ in pronouncing the ^ , and according to an acknow
ledgement made to myself, they differ also greatly among themselves in the
pronunciation of Hebrew in general.
15
it is influenced by the sense of the context,
at least four or five and twenty other signifi
cations : as that, but, or, so, when, therefore,
yet, because, then, now, as, though, &c. Now
if we take this one particle into consideration,
and suppose that the translators had assumed
a freedom in rendering it proportionate to its
latitude.of signification, being guided by what
the sense of the passages respectively required,
no small number of texts would have been
both better understood and more esteemed.
My third consideration respecting the co
herence of the Sacred Text is, that in many
parts of Scripture, and particularly in the
writings of Saint Paul and of Solomon, a
species of tacit dialogue is adopted, which
resembles Seneca's ; where this occurs, that
is frequently mistaken for an argument which
is in reality an objection. It requires little
proficiency in logic to discover how materially
such a mistake must disturb the tenor of any
composition.
I have on a former occasion spoken of the
omission or misplacing of a parenthesis, as
affecting the order of Scripture : in the
Hebrew text they are altogether wanting,
and interpreters have supplied the absence
of them, or introduced them at their own
discretion. An error in this respect, should it
76
occur in a train of argument, might obviously
interrupt the gradation from the premises to
the consequence, and must thus cause it to
appear incoherent.
The same may be the consequence in regard
to points of interrogation : I will not actually
decide whether the critics were correct in
asserting, that in the original Greek copies
of the New Testament there were no such
points ; I can only affirm, that I have found
them wanting in the most ancient manuscripts
which I have examined.
It is certain, that in bur modern copies, both
original and translated, the authors of several
editions have differed from each other, placing
them according to their several opinions. And
although instead of an interrogative point, the
Hebrews make use of the letter J"7 He, yet it
must be as familiar to the observation of a
Hebrew scholar that the sense of the words*
and a certain supposed modulation frequently
make an interrogation, where that He is want
ing ; as it is plainly evident to the logician,
that the interrogation is not always supplied
to the best advantage, in favour of the logic
of Scripture.
In the fifth place I must observe, that the
apostles, and other inspired reasoners in the
Bible, are accustomed to use arguments, not to
77
convince opposers, but to confirm believers :
for the persons with whom they reason, receiv
ing them in many instances as teachers senjt
from God, and on that ground placing implicit
confidence in their doctrine, they may with
propriety use arguments to confirm in their
doctrine men already acquiescing in the prin
ciples of it—men who were persuaded of their
integrity, sufficiency, and authority ; which
arguments it would be improper to urge
agaipst refractory unbelievers.
And as professors, in lecturing their pupils,
are accustomed to use arguments that do not
.suit the case of professed antagonists, so
the apostjes, addressing those who had full
confidence in their inspiration, and in their
(knowledge of the Scriptures, and in the
Resigned dispensations of God, might make
inferences not to be urged with infidels, by
whom the foundation of such arguments might
not be admitted. -For inferences may be
drawn from doctrines delivered by themselves,
or from a text or passage, in contemplating
winch tlhe disciple might justly anticipate a
knowledge of the mind and counsel of God,
•that would give them the advantage of other
tPpen, and,in the writer of which text he might
•ex£rcis/e#n habitual confidence, that he would
teach nothing as from God, which was not so.
s~
78
To make a display of far-sought deductions
and logical reasoning, before a popular au
dience, is at least an inconsistent measure.
The inspired writers, therefore, with more
propriety, have often adopted popular argu
ments, when addressing a common audience,
as likely to possess more influence than those
which are so artificial as to require a logician
to apprehend their force.
Where it is proposed to teach or to persuade,
it is to be considered, not only how far a line
of reasoning possesses natural force, but how
far also it is proportioned to the capacities
and dispositions of those to whom it is ad
dressed : for a spider will surpass a hawk in
catching flies ; and although the greyhound
possesses strength and swiftness, a cat is much
better adapted or qualified to catch mice;
and according to naturalists, a lion is sooner
struck with terror by the crowing of a cock,
than by the bellowing of a bull, although the
latter is naturally a more terrifying sound, and
proceeds from the more formidable animal.
Thus, appropriate arguments, which appeal
to the feelings, humours, and habits of an
audience, liable to be influenced by sudden
impressions, are frequently attended with
more success, than the most irrefragable
syllogizms.
79
In regard to the coherence of the Sacred
Writings, my seventh consideration is, that
many arguments used in Scripture pos
sess no logical force in inducing conviction,
unless received as they were designed, as
argumenta ad hominem: as reasonings designed
not to demonstrate the opinion they contend
for, irrelatively and abstractedly considered,
bat to convince the persons they are addressed
to. Consequently, the inspired writers argu
ing e concessis,, from principles conceded and
confessed by the persons to whom they are
directed, although the principles should be
unsolid, the reasoning is well founded. Thus
there are many texts of the Old Testament
applied to Christ in the Gospels, which al
though they are not adapted to convince the
Jews of the present day, were without any
deviation from logical accuracy, employed
against their ancestors ; because in their time
those passages were so familiarly acknow
ledged to relate to the Messiah, that nothing
more was required in the Evangelists, than
the patient application of them ; whereas the
perverseness of their successors has taught
them to devise so many subtle and fallacious
evasions, to elude the texts we speak of, that
they now dispute, not only the application of
them, but the explication also. Saint Xude
80
argues with the Rhodomontes of his time,
from the story of a contest between the arch
angel and the devil, respecting the body of
Moses : and though perhaps that story, like
the Jewish book from whence it was probably
taken, is somewhat apocryphal, yet as they
held it in reverence, it was not inconsistent
in the apostle to use it in argument with them,
and employ it to overcome their petulant
contempt of the Christian evidences.
Although there is nothing lighter or more
fickle than the wind, yet the skilful pilot
accurately observes it, and renders it more
efficacious in impelling his ship, than the
most powerful and best contrived engines the
age can furnish. Thus although nothing can
be imagined more groundless and unstable
than popular opinion and persuasion fre
quently are, yet a prudent teacher neglects
not to mark them, and may sometimes render
them so far conducive to his purpose, as to
draw from them arguments more operative
than the most accurate syllogizms, which
logic could devise. Indeed assertions are
best supported by arguments drawn from
propositions, in which both parties are agreed.
Socrates, in Plato's dialogues, and skilful
reasohers in general, have often preferred
that mode of reasoning to every other, which
81
draws inferences from the concessions of the
opponent.
To these considerations I shall add the
following: that the reasonings of Scripture
are sometimes the less discernible, and con--
sequently its coincidence with right reason,
from the backwardness divines have shown
in regulating their acceptation of ambiguous
words and phrases, by the scope of the
speaker's meaning, and the general sense of
the context- In regard to the coherence of
Scripture, I do not complain that men are
accustomed to take freedoms with the phrases
and words of the Sacred Text, when some
unusual or even distorted acceptation may
suit their purpose, for most sects of religion
are guilty of this act of dishonesty ; but the
coherence suffers, when they decline the
received signification, so as to make the texts
they treat of harmonize with their own tenets,
and not with the context. The dictate of true
honesty is this, that if the received signification
of a word must be waved for one less current,
an exigency which frequently occurs, it should
be done m order to make Scripture coherent,
or to show the gradation of its reasonings ;
and then as to our private opinions, rather to
render them conformable to the sense ©f Scrip
ture, than to distort the meaning of Scripture
82
to accommodate them. But, perhaps, this
candid and honourable conduct would make
too many of our clamorous disputes subside
into an agreement with those, who have
adopted this method.
The heated tempers of men would be pain
fully humbled to find that some of their
disputes were without ground, and others
without end : many of whom, influenced by
the fierceness of controversy, would rather
that the texts of Scripture were loose stones,
which they might the more easily cast at their
adversaries, than that they should be built
up into one harmonious structure, though
reason herself were the architect.
But to leave these eager disputants to their
animosities, we shall repeat, that the Bible
loses much by not being considered as a
system. Many books indeed may be com
pared to cloth, of which by inspecting a small
pattern, we may securely form an opinion of
the whole piece. But the Bible resembles a
fair suit of arras, a shred of which may assure
you of the brilliance of the colours, and the
richness of the materials ; but the hangings
never appear to advantage, unless displayed
to their full dimensions, and viewed at once.
These considerations, Theophilus, may be
adduced, and many others might be urged,
83
in behalf of the Scriptures, against those
who are obstinate in their censures of them,
according to their mildest language, as a
collection of immethodical and incoherent
passages. But that you may not suspect me
of being biassed by partiality in my assertions,
I ingenuously confess to you, that there are
some things in the economy of Scripture, the
investigation of which distresses my Under
standing, and the solution of which, as it
greatly excites my curiosity, would be most
grateful and acceptable.
But when I call to my remembrance how
many things I once thought incoherent, in
which, according to my opinion, I now
discern a close though mystic connexion :
when I reflect on the Author, and on the
ends of Scripture, and allow myself to ima
gine how exquisite a symmetry Omniscience
already does, and future ages probably will
discover in its method, notwithstanding these
appearances of disorder' that at present dis
turb me ; when I think upon this, I perceive
the propriety of moderating my aspirations
to penetrate into the hidden mysteries, and
concealed designs of Omniscience, and feel
conscious of my inability to judge of the
fitness of means to ends unknown; and am
reduced, to believe that economy the wisest
84
and the best, which is framed by a wisdom
so unbounded, that it can at once survey all
expedients, and so perfectly exempt from
being biassed by partiality, that He can
have no possible view in selecting any on.e,
unless because it is best adapted to accom
plish its purpose.
I must add to what I have already advan
ced, that according to the decided opinion
I have formed, those persons who study tlje
sense of detached portions, or even of de
tached books of Scripture, must be most
inadequate judges of the whole, and their
©pinion thus founded must materially dero
gate from its excellence.
As in a lovely countenance the features
separately regarded may excite admiration
and deserve praise, yet the beauty and the
symmetry of the countenance is not to be
discerned unless seen at once : thus the sepa
rate or detached portions of Scripture, con
templated in themselves, sufficiently discover
and evince their own heavenly extraction :
yet whoever attentively surveys the whole
body of the canonical writings, and regarded
as a system, skilfully compares them with
each other, will discern throughout so admi
rable a plan and disposition of parts, that he
will acknowledge the Book to be the work
85
of the same Wisdom, which so accurately
composed the book of nature, and so divinely
contrived this vast fabric of the universe.
It is a remark worthy of particular notice,
that .the Books of Scripture illustrate and
expound each other : Genesis and the Apo
calypse are in some things reciprocal com
mentaries: in trigonometry, the most dis
tant, the opposite sides and angles are
most useful in demonstrating the measure of
each other, and in the mariner's compass,
the extremity of the needle points to the
North, yet it discovers at the same time
both East and West: thus some texts of
Scripture direct us to a knowledge of others,
which appear assistant in sense, as they
are in their situation in the Sacred Volume.
It is a sublime, in proportion as it is a
pious satisfaction, to observe how the sacred
penmen supply each other's omissions : as it
is very observable in the statement of Christ's
genealogy, made by Saint Matthew and Saint
Luke.
The Divine Wisdom observed various gra
dations in dispensing the knowledge of His
truth and mysteries in the several ages of
the Church, to whom the revelation which
He first vouchsafed was but as a light shining
in a dark place until the dawn of day.
86
But on examination, to find in writings
separated by so many ages and regions, a
prevailing harmony, mutual irradiations, and
secret references, evinces that they were under
the influence of one pervading spirit, that
their pens were guided by an Omniscient
hand, that they Avere no more than the several
secretaries of the same Eternal Enditer.
I profess myself an impartiallist : and do
not hesitate to confess to you, Theophilus,
that I read the Bible and the most learned
expositions of it, with aims and dispositions
in some degree peculiar: I neglect not those
clear passages and neglect not to make ob
vious deductions, which may establish the
doctrines of that Church to which I most
adhere ; yet I so far follow her example, that
I come not to the Scriptures with a multitude
of peculiar tenets, which I am resolved to
maintain by arguments, whether drawn or
extorted from them, to the overthrow of all
antagonists : for I esteem it less safe to carry
my opinions to the Scriptures, than to take
them up there. And it is no part of my
concern to collect those subtle glosses or
inferences, that can only contribute to sup
port one subdivision of Christians against
another : but I hold myself at liberty to
make observations, which may justify my
87
own impressions on solid ground, and pro
mote within me a reverence for Scripture
itself, and for Christianity in general : obser
vations, which may discover to me a majesty
and perfection in the Bible, and in its chief
revelations, which are honourable to the
Divine Author, and which rise far above the
standard of human compositions ; unveiling
to me that "manifold wisdom of God,"* which
angels themselves desire to look into.
These are the objects in reference to spe
culative divinity, which I confess afford me
the highest gratification ; and which I most
earnestly pursue through the writings of
divines, who ground their reasonings on
Scripture: and in this pursuit I find much
satisfaction in the abler commentaries of all
sects, to which writings I occasionally extend
my researches, thinking no pains misapplied,
which yield me solid evidences of that great
truth, that Scripture is the Word of God.
For this is indeed the great and funda
mental principle; all other doctrines which
are received as articles of faith being better
deducible from this, than this can be from
any other. . -
And I resort to Scripture, not as to an
arsenal for arms to defend a party or to
defeat its enemies, but as to a beautiful tem
* Thai expressed in the original : Htkvtc!xi}.ti £ty<« rv ©mi;.—Epli. 3, 10.
88
pie, where I delight to range, and contem
plate the elegance, the symmetry, and the
magnificence of the structure; to cultivate
an awful reverence, and to indulge my
devotion to that Being, who is there announ
ced, and whose adorable attributes are there
displayed.
Wbt dFouttft ©Iijtttfom
ON THE PROPRIETY OR APPOSITENESS OF SCRIPTURE
TEXTS.
W^e are informed by the apostle of the Gen
tiles, that the whole Scripture* is " divinely
inspired,! and is profitable for doctrine, for
conviction, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness ; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good
works ;" and the apostle of the circumcision
assures us that " prophecy came not in old
time by the will of man, but holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost/
2 Peter, 1, 21. Hence it cannot be imagined
that so august an enditer should solemnly
publish to the world, and for the peculiar
benefit of His church, any thing that ought
" nStw ymfi. fftitiw.-2 Tim. 3. 15, 1&
89
to be accounted impertinent or useless,
particularly when communicated through
penmen, most of whom were distinguished
by the gifts of prophecy, or by the power
of working miracles : yet of these qualities
many persons who possess a greater mea
sure of confidence, than either of learning or
consideration, are pleased to impeach nu
merous passages of Scripture.
The Bible is acknowledged to be the
work of God : and that Divine Being, who
observed so much accuracy in the dimensions
and proportions, and in all other circum
stances relating to the ancient tabernacle,
although it were but a typical and temporary
structure, may be believed to have exercised
the same caution, that nothing superfluous
should intrude into thai Volume ; which,
being consigned to the church for its perpe
tual use and instruction, must contain nothing
which does not contribute to those designs,
the smallest text in its composition being as
conducive to the perfection of the Bible, as
every loop or pin was to the perfection of the
tabernacle. • •
In withholding from the canon of Scripture
so many of the writings of Solomon—in with
holding also, in condescension to the weakness
of our capacities, so many of the discourses
G
90
and miracles of our Saviour, and in so won
derfully preserving the whole Scripture ; the
Supreme Author, in my opinion, abundantly
evinces His design, that nothing should be
enchased on the Sacred Tablet, that does not
contribute to the people's instruction.
I must here observe, respecting the books
pretended to be lost, although written by
acknowledged prophets, that they are either
now extant in our Bibles under other names,
or they cannot be demonstrated ever to have
been canonical, that is, entrusted to the church
as the infallible rule of faith and life.
Were my time wholly at my own disposal,
and were I not also confined in some measure
as to the limits of my essay, from the fear
of distressing your patience, I might easily
adduce instances from Scripture, in which
texts apparently without meaning would am
ply vindicate their wisdom, and refute those
who disparage them.
I can, however, assert from my own expe
rience, that many passages for which at the
first or second perusal I could neither discover
nor conjecture any utility, at the third or fourth
reading I have discovered to be so fertile in
applications, that the richness of those texts
and my own dulness of apprehension equally
excited my surprise.
91
On a superficial or cursory perusal, many
things are received as trivial or superfluous,
which a clearness of reflection discloses to be
mysterious.
A knowledge of Scripture is inestimable in
itself, but its value is greatly enhanced by its
relative usefulness ; as an acquaintance with
the full import of some texts imparls a facility
to our inquiries respecting others. If divine
truths were prized according to their real
worth, the knowledge and acquisition of them
would be esteemed as exceeding in value a
greater knowledge of other things, as a jew
eller's store and workmanship are more to be
admired than those of an ordinary mason.
In this place my former remark may he
appropriate, to show the utility or appositeness
of many passages, which are in a great
measure unnecessary to ourselves : that the
Bible was not written for one particular time
or people, hut for the whole church militant,
diffused throughout all nations and ages.
Thus many passages ware almost exclusively
useful to the Jews, particularly such as were
opposed to the magical rites of the Zabians ;
and the utility of some others, which were
equally important, may be reserved to a future
age, by that Infinite mind who endjted them ;
and with whom all times and ail events are
92
combined and united in one view. Sortie
heresy which may originate when the present
generation are no more, may require the
application of texts at present undervalued ;
some yet unformed doubt, or some error that
hath not yet a name. Hence, all the parts
of Scripture may be shown to be useful in
some ages, and some part9 in all ages. .
At the institution of the eucharist, the
expression which our Lord used to the disciples
respecting the sacramental wine, was this,—
" Drink ye all of it."—Mat. 26, 27. Mark
14, 23. Whereas, on delivering to them the
bread, the word all is omitted. The primitive
Christians might have been surprised at the
circumstance, and discerning no reason for
it, might have been tempted to think the
distinction useless or superfluous.
But living in an age in which the cup is by
a foreign Church denied to the greater part of
the communicants, we are inclined not only to
justify this distinction, but to admire it. The
rnystic rites and ceremonies of the Mosaic
law, which, as the sacred manger to the shep
herds, hold forth to us, as it were enveloped
in his earliest garments, the infant Saviour,
to many on perusing them seem scarcely to
repay the exercise of their attention.—Luke 2.
Yet in considering the striking illustrations
93
of the Christian doctrine, which the apostles
drew from their law, to the conversion of the
Jews, and the forcible applications to the
same purpose which it still offers to ourselves,
the admission of the ceremonial law into
the sacred canon is fully vindicated from
the charge of inutility. And permit me,
Theophilus, to remark, that those leading
controversies in support of our common faith
against those without, are rather entided to
the appropriation of a wise man's time and
learning, than those apparently trivial contests
which so unhappily, and even to so little
purpose, distract the church of Christ.
How many passages of the prophets are
there, by listless readers, accounted wholly
unprofitable, which, as the star seen by the
wise men of the east, offer their heavenly
light, to direct the attentive peruser to Christ
(Mat. 2); and in harmonious combination
with the typical indications of Moses, almost
perceptibly utter the words of Saint John,
" Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh
away the sins of the world !"—John 1, 29.
Hence, it frequently occurs to me to appl v
to some event recorded in the New Testament,
what Saint Matthew remarks in his narrative
of our Lord's apprehension; "All this was
done, that the Scriptures of the prophets
94
might be fulfilled ;" or rather, all this was
done, so that they were fulfilled.*
At the first survey of them, the law, the
prophets, and the Gospel appear wholly
separate and distinct; but on a second in
spection, and from an attentive comparison
of their several corresponding passages, the
former have evidently their fulfilment in the
Gospel of Christ : of this, the transfiguration
of our Lord is a typical illustration. The
favoured apostles first beheld Moses and Elias
talking with Jesus, (Mat. 17. 3, 8) but when
He had spoken to them, and the cloud was
withdrawn, the second vision discovered to
them no one, but Jesus only ; of whom, to
use an apostle's words, Moses in the law,
and the prophets did write, (John 1, 55) and
to whom their types and predictions pointed.
The instances which occur in the Old Tes
tament* of the confused or disjointed statement
of known prejudices and stories, were consi
dered by the ancient Jews probably not only
asetess.but even an incumbrance to the Sacred
Canon ; but they are highly useful to us, in
putting to silence the cavils of modern Jews,
when they would invalidate the authority of
the New Testament, from the obscure strain
used in the narrative of Saint Stephen, and
in the genealogies drawn out by some of the
•Thus the context frequently requires the word Ira to be rendered in these citations.
95
evangelists. Such objections might be easily
retaliated on the Jewish- nation, were there
no common enemy who might take advantage
of the quarrel, and employ the arguments of
either party against both. There are in the
Apocalypse many passages, of which we are
equally unacquainted with the meaning and
the utility, that in future ages will doubtless
be found not unprofitable, when once the
accomplishment shall bring to light the true
expositions of those predictions, and attest
the Omniscience of the Inspirer.
Thus the ancient Hebrews in general might
have been wholly unacquainted with thedesign
of many legal constitutions, which are appro
priate to the Christian view of revealed truth.
My conversations with their modern Rabbins
convince me, that while they obstinately deny
their application to the Messiah, they can
scarcely attach a greater measure of sense or
import to the inspired and mysterious laws of
Moses, than the Egyptians and Gymnosophists
could to their sacrifices and other ritual
devotions. I must, however, except those
passages which relate to the Zabian super
stition, with which also their doctors ave
generally as little acquainted as our own.
I do not consider all the books which consti
tute the canon of Scripture of equal necessity,
96
or of equal usefulness, because they are of
equal extraction : nor do I consider that the
church would lose as much in the prophecy
of Nahum, as in that of Isaiah ; or in the
book of Ruth, as in the epistle to the Romans,
or the Gospel of Saint John : for the fixed
stars themselves, though of the same firma
ment, are not of equal magnitude or lustre.
But I consider all the constituent books
of Scripture as necessary to the canon of it,
as two eyes, two arms, and the rest of the
members are all necessary to the body. The
body may exist, though deprived of several
pf its members, but its perfection is lost with
the absence of any one of them ; as they
are all of great utility, though not of equal
importance.
It may, perhaps, without surpassing the
bounds of moderation and propriety, be
further seriously asserted respecting the Scrip
tures, that in regard to the two great divisions
of the Sacred Canon, there may be some
relative inequalities \ yet they are both hea
venly and instructive, inestimably excelling
in value any object the earth affords, and
surpassing in importance any composition
which human skill has produced : as the stars
which shine in the firmament differ greatly in
magnitude, when compared with each other,
97
-
>
yet are they both lucid and celestial, and
far more magnificent and immense than
any object which the earth presents to our
observation.
To this I must add one more illustration :
that it is observed by mineralogists, that
valuable mines are usually found beneath a
surface, injured as to its fertility by rising
fumes, and ornamented neither with plants,
fruit-trees, nor verdure ; its internal richness
affording an abundant compensation for its
want of fertility. Thus many parts of Scrip
ture, outwardly barren and unpromising,
which gratify our inquiries neither by in
struction nor consolation, being searched into
by an industrious student, searched into as
for hidden treasure, will afford out of their
penetrated concealments, rich and precious
mysteries of divinity.
i- . • , i. .. ,
i • • • • i
98
®be fifth <&fcf*rtiotu
NOTHING CONTAINED IN SCRIPTURE IS EITHER TRIVIAL
OR IMPERTINENT.
The imputation to the prejudice of the
Scriptures, which I propose now to consider
is, that it contains many things trivial op
impertinent; and the possibility that many
things may appear so, which are not, will
at least be admitted. Among these may be
numbered unconnected speeches and abrupt
transitions ; defects alleged against many of
our Saviour's discourses, in which it lias been
also observed, that He sometimes answered
when there was no question to reply to, and
sometimes that the question put to him was
not even alluded to in the answer which he
made to it. But so far from being an imper
fection, this may be assigned as an excellence
in the replies of our Lord, who possessing
the prerogative of discerning the hearts of
men, replied to the feeling by which he knew
them to be actuated. His oratory assumed
a path in which our's is unable to follow it.
He prosecuted his great design by using a
99
diversity of method in his discourses, and
wisely measured the propriety of His heavenly
sermons by their relation to His purpose, with
out confining himself to one specific theme.
He knew his hearers' thoughts, and addressed
himself to them : He reached them in their
earliest formation, as it were in their first
cradle, before they were matured into lan
guage, and convinced his auditory, not more
by answering their thoughts* than by disco
vering that he knew them. His parables,
though sometimes lightly esteemed, in many
instances contain not only a most refined
morality, but include also important prophe
cies. Thus the oriental oyster furnishes a
delicacy for the table, and is also rendered
more valuable by the pearls which it contains.
The parable of the grain of mustard seed,
that suddenly grew to so large a plant* was
a prediction, to the fulfilment of which out
own experience testifies, indicating the admit
rably swift progression of the Gospel* which
from very humble beginnings soon flourished
and increased, so as to acquire as just a claim
to the wonder* as to the faith of mankind.
The parable of the treacherous husbandmen,
clearly predicted our Lord's death, through
the malice of the Jews, and their consequent
destruction. And I despair not to see pro
100
phecies disclosed in others of them which
have been hitherto unheeded, and even think
it probable, that a work now in progress may
contribute to this, the design of which is to
show, that many passages of the New Testa
ment, which have been otherwise interpreted
are in reality prophecies. And my hope of
the success of this work is confirmed from the
character I have received of its author, from
one of the most celebrated of the modern
Rabbins, Manasse Ben Israel, during a visit
I made him at his own house at Amsterdam,
who assured me that he considered him the
ablest person among the Christians.
Those historical circumstances cavilled at
in the parables of our Lord, are like the
feathers that wing our arrows, which though
they pierce not like the point, but seem
trivial in themselves and of a different qua
lity from the rest, are yet indispensably
requisite to guide the course of the arrow,
and to enable it to penetrate the mark.
Nothing in Scripture is thought more futile
than its frequent repetitions : but what may
appear to the superficial or unlearned merely
repetitions, those who are accustomed to
deeper research will find to contribute some
light or some addition to what had before
been announced. "
101
The stars appear to be all alike, to com
mon observers, but according to the theory
of the astrologist, are supposed to contain
under the colour and figure common to them
all, very peculiar and distinct influences.
There are in most languages certain redu
plications, particularly in the Hebrew, which
a stranger to the language may mistake for
redundancy of expression ; of which those to
whom it was vernacular were sensible, both
of the propriety and the force. There are
indeed few of those passages which appear
trivial or irrelative, for which a learned and
judicious expositor cannot assign a pertinent
cause and reason. . .
And further, according to a former obser
vation, as the books of Scripture were endited
at different times, the repetition of the same
sin required the repetition of the same
remedies;* which are therefore not to be
regarded as superfluous, but as being used
in attestation, and to the conviction of the
sinner's obstinacy : a repetition which may
justly be compared to the redoubled blows
of the hammer, in driving a nail to the head :
for according to king Solomon's expression,
the words of the wise are as nails fastened by
* That is imperfectly taught which is not perfectly learned ; Nunquam satis
docetur quod nunquam satis discitur.
y
102
the masters of assemblies: (Eccles. 12. 11.)
the renewed blows of the hammer are without
difference, yet no one of them is superfluous,
the number alone rendering the operation
efficacious. Those who have sufficient skill
and learning to separate the real substance
of a composition from the garb and disguise
of language and ornament, under which it is
concealed, will very easily find that many
books are composed of varied repetitions,
which I have found to differ from the repe
titions of Scripture in this respect, that
Scripture presents us with new matter in
old words, whereas the former usually offer
us worn out materials in a new dress.
The sophistry of heretics displays much
subtlety in its falsehoods and evasions : and
our experience is mournfully convincing as
to their success in eluding the force of single
texts, and in imposing their inventions on
the credulity of mankind.
The Holy Ghost foreseeing this from the
beginning, hath mercifully and wisely provi
ded, that the more important points of faith
and morals should be displayed in so many
places, and by so great a diversity of expres
sion, that what is signified in some of them,
must unavoidably intercept those evasions,
and escape those misconstructions that so
103
phistry might place upon the rest. Thus
hath Providence preserved many articles
from the attempts of heretics, rendering it
both shameful and hopeless to disprove or
call in question truths attested by more than
two or three witnesses, and affording to the
orthodox believer the satisfaction of having
his anchor made fast to a threefold cord,
which is not easily broken; to a cable which
will not easily give way.
It may be generally remarked of truths re
peatedly inculcated, that each contains some
shade of doctrine not observable in the rest.
In Pharoah's vision both the ears and the
kiue had the same signification : yet Joseph's
interpretation proves that neither was super
fluous.—Gen. 41, 25, 32. Even where nothing
else is to be learned, we are impressed at least
with the importance of those assertions, which
had been frequently repeated. I have no
hesitation in indulging myself by offering
one tcoucluding illustration: for I find it
hopeless sufficiently to testify my admira
tion. I would compare Scripture, in regard
to its expressions, to a rose, in which so great
a number of leaves so nearly resemble each,
other, but there is not one contained in the
flower, that does not contribute to its perr
fection and beauty.
104.
Q$t £txtf) ®Wttiott.
ON THE CONSISTENCY OF SCRIPTURE.
The nature of my present inquiry does not
oblige me to examine those objections, which
relate rather to the truth and authority, than
to the style of Scripture.
I am not unacquainted with the^P Keri, and
the ITO Cethib, and the CTIBO PPT1 Tickun
Sophrim in the Old Testament, nor with the
Venice lectiones, (particularly with those which
are attributed to the Eastern and Western
Jews), which are noticed by modern critics
in the Hebrew text of the Old, as well as in
the Greek text of the New Testament: nor
am I ignorant of the difficulties to be met
with in vindicating the citations found in the
Gospels and the Epistles, of texts taken from
the Old Testament : for they are frequently
seen to differ greatly from what we find
extant, on referring to the passage itself.—
And this difficulty sometimes extends not
only to the words, but to the sense.
These things which are much urged against
the Scriptures have not escaped my obser
vation. But I think it unnecessary to con
105
sider them in this place, for the reason already
assigned, as well as from the successful replies
to these cavils, which have been rendered by
men who have been well qualified for that
office, by their judgment and their learning.
I have already treated of those cavils though
not at length : I may however enlarge upon
them in my treatise on the Christian Religion.
Upon these grounds also it is, Theophilus,
that I decline to consider the usual objections
representing that many contradictions occur
in the Sacred Writings. Yet to this one cir
cumstance I now invite your notice, that it
is not so much the actual deviations from
consistency, which I have observed to en
cumber a composition with interfering pas
sages and contradictory assertions, as the
various prepossessions and interests of the
expositors. Let a book be exempt from all
ground of exception, if the subject deeply
involve the interests of men, persons of dif
ferent parties, partial to their own opinions,
and subtle in expedients to advance them ;
their judgment preengaged, their passions
biassed, will obstinately insist on perverting
texts to justify their impressions, and pro
mote their designs; and to reconcile them
respectively to their own views, scruple not
to draw them up in fierce hostility against
H
106
each other. Of this I might adduce a strik
ing example from the physical writings of
Aristotle, an author cited by many opposing
sects of schoolmen, to countenance their jar
ring opinions; the injured Stagyrite, employed
as second by every one that quotes him, being
by each party brought to fight with its anta
gonists, and compelled by them all to give
battle to himself. Thus the contending sects
of Mahomedans dispute about the sense of
their Alkoran, and respectively extolling it as
their chief ornament, employ their skill and
their taste in moulding it into such a form, and
imparting to it such a colour, as to constitute
it a nose of wax, harmonizing with their various
countenances and complexions.
It is not to those things hard to be understood
in Saint Paul's epistles, to Atdiich the caution
of Saint Peter exclusively applies ; but the
other Scriptures are said by the same apostle
to be wrested to their own destruction, by the
unlearned and the unstable.*
A temperate author, to be fairly treated,
requires that the reader should be impartial,
so far as to receive his words in their genuine
and obvious acceptation, admitting another
signification, only where it is manifestly forced
Upon him by the context : the writer is then
not liable to be misunderstood. But what
» 2 Peter, 3, 14 The tunrnla ma. and xiiwai yfiifxi.
107
foresight could avail against men of active and
prejudiced imagination, who sit down to read
not under the impressions that actuated the
author, but with the full intention to make
him express their own : who, patient of labour,
turn in their minds every possible acceptation
of a word or phrase, and assuming the liberty
of fixing upon that which best serves their
present purpose, allow themselves to remain
satisfied with the conjectural inference, it may
signify so and so elsewhere, therefore it does
so here.
Under these circumstances, an author must
be more wary than Homer or Virgil, whom
Eudocia and Alexander Rosse have made
evangelists, to protect his words from being
tortured into a confession of what was never
in his thoughts.
A very striking illustration of this truth
may be drawn from the language of the law,
which is written with the utmost preciseness
of expression, with a total disregard of orna
ment, and is incumbered with even superfluous
repetitions, with the view to prevent any pos
sible contention as to its meaning; and is
brought to jin exactness of formality, that
nothing but its being conducive to so good
a purpose, could render supportable. Yet
this is not a sufficient barrier against the
108
misconstructions and perversions of interested
cunning: hence the protracted length to which
private suits are frequently drawn out; hence
the perplexity ofjudges, which occasions them
to suspend their decisions almost for ages ;
hence injuries are committed in legal form, and
capital prosecutions are unjustly maintained :
and all this is frequently done under the im
pression, we may hope, that such proceedings
are justified by the law, and are followed to
support its authority.
From the conversations I have had with
some opposers of Scripture, I am confirmed
in the belief, that by transferring our impres
sions to the Sacred Text, we often impute to
the Scriptures our own faults and deficiencies.
It is, however, neither wise nor successful to
dispute with unbelievers as to every nicety,
where the defeat of their objections gives us
no victory over their incredulity : it is to
apologize rather than to advocate, and by
maintaining that the Scriptures are not false or
not absurd, may serve to justify our reverence
for them, but is not calculated to impart it to
others. But the measure attended with the
greatest success, is firmly to assert the divine
origination of the Scriptures, to reduce men
to ascribe their scruples to the true cause,
to bend them to the temper of the apostles
109
manifested, when their Lord had uttered a
hard saying, which unsettled the minds of
many of the disciples, and caused them to
desert their master.
The apostles on that occasion, though among
many misapprehensions they understood not
the obnoxious saying aright, yet maintained,
an undeviating confidence, declaring through
Saint Peter, " Thou hast the words of eternal
life, and we believe and are sure, that thou
art the Christ, the Son of the living God \"—
John 6. 60, 66, 68, 69. They thus transmit
to us the useful lesson, to silence particular
scruples, by urging one grand and compre
hensive truth. : • '
It is not unworthy our time and reflection
to remark, that the most learned men the
world has produced, have from the earliest
ages believed the truth and authority of the
Scriptures ; and consequently that they are not
contradictory to themselves. . This I may have
occasion elsewhere to dwell upon more atlarge.
I must here notice, however, that such cha
racters may be reasonably supposed in many
instances to have examined opinions without
any other view in their inquiries, than that of
not being deceived ; or any other end, than
that of discovering the truth. Men of learning
and assiduity, indeed, have found difficulties
110
in the Bible, which our querists had no means
of discerning : notwithstanding which, inferior
considerations, they have deduced from their
varied researches the absolute truth of the
Scriptures, and declare the belief of them to
be grounded on as much evidence, and as
much reason, as is consistent with a due lati
tude for the exercise of faith ; a confirmation
of which is the best result of all our inquiries.
If objects of faith are too clearly discerned
by the understanding, it is no longer an
acceptable virtue of the will.
Faith, indeed, resembles the morning twi
light in this circumstance, that a mixture of
darkness is requisite to both : with too reful
gent a light, the one vanishes into knowledge,
and the other into day.
Faith having thus presented herself in my
way, it may not be improper to observe,
that when a belief of the divine inspiration of
the Holy Scriptures is once embraced, faith,
thus encouraged in its first dawnings, is a
virtue so acceptable to God, that he often
condescends to increase it by the discovery of
arguments, more convincing than those in
which it originated ; impressing on the young
believer's mind the consistency of having
submitted his reason to Him that gave it
him.
Ill
Thus our Lord vouchsafed to encourage
Nathaniel. The guileless Israelite acknow
ledged the Messiah, on His bare assertion,
that He saw him under the fig-tree. Our
blessed Saviour gave him this encouragement,
" Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under
the fig-tree, believest thou ? Thou shalt see
greater things than these."—John 1. 50.
Faith would seem to possess a mysterious
influence to enlighten the understanding,
more efficacious in its operation than argu
ments and demonstrations. It happens to
the new convert, as it did to the two blind
men spoken of in the Gospel : our Lord
first required them to believe; and having
found that they possessed faith, He then
opened their eyes.
112
®be gifeint!) ©fcjerttoiu
ON THE FRUITFULNESS OR UTILITY OF THE SCRIPTURES.
I have already spoken of, and sufficiently
vindicated the frequent repetitions to be met
with in the Sacred Writings. I have also
noticed the method wherein the great Author
has been pleased that divine truth should be
promulgated, which differs from the order
usually observed in human compositions.—
These circumstances, however, have inclined
many persons to censure the Bible, as a
volume which cannot be considered fertile
and productive, in proportion to its extent.
That instructions are but scantily dispersed
through it, in comparison with other compo
sitions, where repetitions are avoided, and a
larger mass of useful information is delivered
in. fewer words.
To this they ascribe it, that many persons
decidedly religious, lay aside the Bible for
the perusal of other books of devotion and
morality, as containing more full and more
instructive precepts.
113
I might answer this allegation by represent
ing, that as the several particulars on which
the accusation is grounded, have already
become the subject of my remarks, I need not
say any thing distinctly to this accumulative
charge. But being anxious not only to vin
dicate my own impressions, but to extend
the sentiment of veneration for the Sacred
Writings, which I experience myself ; I shall
in reply to the cavils now brought forward,
offer two or three things to consideration.
Let us suppose a great part of their ar
gument substantiated ; let us suppose the
Scriptures to be less replenished with excellent
doctrines, and that they did not excel other
books, and that the best of them might be
compared to mines, where the gold is mingled
with less precious materials, the separation
of which demands much laborious exertion.
Under this supposition, the Bible would
scarcely be denied to merit some attention :
nor could it be thought an unprofitable zeal,
should the grateful Christian imitate the person
represented in the parable, who having found
"a treasure hid in a field," (Mat. 13. 44) with
held no sum he had the power to command,
but purchased the whole field, for the treasure
it contained. But there is much reason for
gratitude, that the case is otherwise; for it
114
can only arise from indolence, from ignorance,
or from want of devotion, if the Scripture do
not appear so far from justifying the objector's
comparison to a wilderness, or a barren soil,
as to resemble rather the blessed land of
promise, so often distinguished as flowing with
milk and honey, abounding with things useful
and delightful. Indeed it would not be raising
the comparison too high, to draw the parallel
between the Scriptures and paradise itself; of
which it is affirmed, that there the "Lord God
made to grow every tree that is pleasing to the
sight, and good for food, the tree of life also
in the midst of the garden."—Gen. 2. 9-
And indeed as the Author of it was infinite
in knowledge, so our experience informs us,
that he has so far manifested his Omniscience
in Scripture, that the higher the degree of
knowledge its pious readers have attained to,
the greater number of resplendent truths
they have developed. The Scripture being,
to adduce a more appropriate illustration, like
the heavens, where the stronger our sight, and
the better our glasses are, the more lights we
discover.
And that this may not bear the appearance
of a gratuitous encomium, let it be considered
that a book may abound with instruction, as
well in regard to speculative truths, as to
115
practical : and that Christians ought to be
as well informed of the attributes of God,
according to his own declaration of them,
and as they are displayed in his works, as of
his moral and religious duties.
It is an undisputed assertion, that there are
no speculative truths so noble or so elevated,
as those that have God for their object: so is
there no book, from which so great a mass
of information is to be collected, as from the
Bible, respecting the nature and even the
thoughts of God, and of those deep mysteries
which, as I formerly cited from Saint Peter,
the angels themselves desire to penetrate. It
may even be asserted, that no other book can
render any instruction that may be confided
in, respecting any of those sublime subjects,
with the exception of what is borrowed from
the Sacred Writings.
The compositions of heathen philosophers
and other authors, are justly esteemed for
being enriched with some remote conjectures
respecting divine truth, though much debased
by the alloy their suggestions are liable to,
from the natural imperfections of human
writers, always subject to error, and who
are, generally speaking, in a greater or less
degree, actually erroneous. Hence to accuse
that Book of barrenness or inutility, which
116
contains an authentic record of truths, the
very shadows of which have excited the vene
ration of mankind, is obviously inconsistent
and injurious. I may probably say more on
this subject in another place.
I shall now, however, add one observation
respecting the preference given to other books
of religion and morality. Those who prefer
them to the Scriptures, with the view of at
taining to the virtues of a good life, might be
induced to alter their opinion, if they would
maturely consider, that to engage men to lead
a holy and a religious life, much more is
requisite, than merely to tell them that they
ought to do so, and in what manner it should
be accomplished.
A virtuous course of life very generally
demands the denial and conquest of natural
appetite and inclination. Constancy is also
requisite to persevere in that which is acknow
ledged to be liable to hardships and dangers.
Hence, to accumulute precepts, is not a
sufficient security to virtue, for precepts in
themselves offer no motive to obedience. It
is more important to incline men to virtue,
than to influence them to a certain course of
action, supposing them to be virtuous ; and
that system which can do no more, is evidently
far less efficacious, than another which exclu
117
sively of laws and rules of living, presents to our
consideration the most persuasive inducements
to embrace virtue, and the most powerful ar
guments against vice and impiety : a system
which holds out rewards and punishments,
demonstrating their reality, and showing their
necessary dependance on virtue and vice—
that men cannot arrive at either wisdom or
happiness without being virtuous, nor avoid
the severest miseries without avoiding vice.
In the progress of these considerations, it
will be shown that the Bible is not unfur
nished with the precepts of virtue: and in
reference to the more operative method of
promoting it, it abounds with motives to
good, and dissuasives from evil, exercising
an influence, which no other book possesses,
and which no uninspired volume can ever
claim. In regard to the rewards and punish
ments that are to be distributed after death,
to those who respectively obey or violate the
laws of God, human testimony possesses not
the same authority to conciliate our belief
of them, which necessarily accompanies the
Word of God. Under whatever impressions
philosophers and other learned men may
have been respecting it, the future dispen
sations of God to man depend on the Divine
Will, and consequently are not to be expli
118
citly known but by His revelation, which He
has communicated through no other channel,
known to mankind, but the Holy Scriptures.
Hence it is no just occasion of surprise, that
Saint Paul should ascribe it to our Saviour
Christ, that " He hath brought life and
immortality to light through the Gospel.—
2 Tim. 1, 10. ' . ;
Wherever difficulty or danger is to be
encountered in a measure even less than
that which accompanies a religious and vir
tuous course of life, hope is requisite to
engage men to the enterprise: without it
their undertakings are not accompanied with
cheerfulness, nor their progress with resolu>-
tion. This operating and animating princi
ple, recognised by the Christian in a measure
both sublime and influential, is shown by
Saint Paul to take its rise in a revealed
truth, where he gives God thanks for having
" according to His abundant mercy, begotten
Us to a lively hope, by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead."—1 Pet. 1, 3.
Such a knowledge of God, and of the
Redeemer, if at all attainable, must be de
rived from the Scriptures: and such hopes
and encouragement the finest discernment
and the strongest powers of reasoning can
draw from no other source, than from God
119
himself, or from those through whom He has
been pleased to impart His will to mankind.
,. What influence this knowledge may have
upon human conduct, may be inferred front
another passage of the same Apostle, where
he announces the bounty of God having
" through His divine power or efficacy given
to us all things that pertain unto life and
godliness, through the knowledge of Him
who hath called us to glory and virtue,"—-
(2 Pei. 1. 3, 4,) and marks the influence of
that knowledge in a still more striking man
ner, when he speaks of our being made
" partakers of the divine nature, and escap
ing the corruption that is in the world through
lust," by those exceeding great and precious
promises, that are given of God unto us.
Hence had the Scriptures been wholly
silent as to moral or ethical instruction, had
they influenced us to holiness of life, only
on the consideration of the Divine attributes,
and those important truths, which although
conjectured by human reason, can be received
ottly on inspired authority. If Scripture had
done no more than thus invite us to holiness,
leaving it to the dictates of nature, and the
exercise of reason to furnish Us with rules of
virtue, it would even then contain instruction
most influential, in promoting the virtues of
120
a holy life. For the proper exercise of reason,
and the dictates of the law of nature would
enable our own reflection to supply the place
of ethical writings, in most things useful to
moral conduct.
As an evidence of its influence, we may
confidently appeal to experience, which evi
dences, that the New Testament, though
contained in so small a space, has excelled
the writings of all the philosophers and
orators, in the advancement of virtue ; par
ticularly in the primitive ages of the Church,
when the attention of those who received it
was not materially diverted from it by the
perusal of other books. The Scriptures are
possessed of an animating and a regenerat
ing efficacy. When the weather is favorable,
the moon indeed may lend the horticulturist
sufficient light to guide him in preparing his
ground, or in pruning his trees : yet none
will affirm, that the moon contributes as
much to his success in obtaining an abundant
produce as the sun ; since the sublimer light
not only irradiates his land, and cheers him
with its genial rays, but animates him with
the hopes he cherishes from its fertilizing
efficacy, that in due season his diligence and
toils will be rewarded. The application is
too obvious, to require to be explained.
121
Those doctrines which are wholly separate
from ethical dogmas, will therefore justly
entitle Scripture to be regarded as highly
conducive to the practice of piety and virtue.
Yet the sublime code of morality which it
actually contains may be fairly adduced, to
vindicate its claim to the appellation of a
transcendent guide and instructor in virtue.
Virtue has with strict propriety been divi- ,
ded, into moral and christian : both of which
are requisite to the believer. That the rules of
those virtues which are peculiarly christian are
to be found in the Scriptures, will scarcely be
disputed. For the Sacred Volume is acknow
ledged by protestants to possess that suffici
ency in itself, in reference to revelation, that
whatever is not expressly, or by consequence
to be gathered from thence, is not to be ob
truded upon us as a duty, or required to be
believed as an article of the faith. Hence di
vines have frequently drawn their arguments
negatively, as well as affirmatively from the
Scriptures, although the Sufficiency implied,
by this practice should be confined to those
topics, which strictly speaking, are derived
from revelation. J ;..;;;,:.;
Thus as the dial, in which the shadow as<
well as the light informs us, Scripture is
instructive in its silence, as well as in its
i
122
marked expression ; and frequently commu
nicates much, by saying nothing.
Systems are obviously the result of human
industry ; and we must not infer from the
absence of systematical arrangement, that the
Sacred Volume is destitute of what is essen
tially excellent in ethical writings. By those
who are skilled in constellating the lights of
Scripture, a very excellent code of morality
might be gathered from the Sacred Writings,
accompanied with the most influential motives
to the several duties, and the most retracting
dissuasives from the contrary vices.
In reference to heathen systems of ethics,
my esteem for them has long been declining,
from the following reflection, that ethics being
the doctrine of regulating our passions and
directing our faculties, in order to the attain
ment of felicity, they have hitherto been
treated of by those who had little knowledge
of the nature of the faculties and passions of
the mind ; when on the contrary, the Author
of Scripture morals is intimately and most
perfectly acquainted with the constitution and
faculties of our souls ; the most appropriate
and effectual modes of influencing them cannot
therefore be concealed from His knowledge.
And under these circumstances the illustration
is not inapplicable, that a watchmaker will
123
i
be more successful in mending a watch that
is out of order, than one unacquainted with
the art. " •
In reference also to that division of virtue,
distinguished by the appellation of moral, if
whatever is to be found in Scripture res
pecting it were drawn up into one regular
system, it would not so readily escape the
notice of ordinary readers ; for moral precepts
combined with other subjects, are scattered
through ils pages with no parsimonious hand.
These, indeed, are overlooked by readers
who are superficial in their perusal, but re
ward the diligence of those who search the
Scriptures. • "" :
The last consideration proposed represents
those religious persons who lay aside the
Scriptures, and prefer books of ethics and
devotion, as guilty of injustice, both to them
selves and to the Bible : and the inference I
should draw from my present remarks would
incline me to assume, that which is prejudicial
to the wisdom of their practice, rather than
to the sufficiency of the Book of God.
The wish of Luther, that all his books of
devotion were burnt, raises him greatly in my
opinion; because he discovered, that the im
moderate esteem and veneration attached to
them, caused the Scriptures to be neglected.
124
The observation of Seneca might properly
be applied to this : " that every work of
God equally transcends whatever is of human
production."* But I prefer the following
illustration : that in respect to the Sacred
Volume, devotional compositions are like the
luminaries of our system compared with the
sun; whose emanations confer on them all
their lustre, but in His presence they are
utterly overwhelmed and lost.
Let me not be misunderstood as disparaging
the usefulness Or combatting the authority of
some books of prayer and devotion : it is only
to the superlative degree of merit, that I refuse
to acknowledge their claim. Whatever is
peculiarly excellent in the best devotional
compositions, is confessedly borrowed, or,
without acknowledgment, taken from the
Holy Scriptures.
What precepts are so venerable as those
which they contain—what motives so effica
cious to persuade us to a virtuous and holy life
(—what invitations so encouraging ! Hence
I am anxious, that the fountain should not be
neglected for the streams; and esteem it the
mark neither of wisdom nor of gratitude, to
prefer reading the word of God in any book,
rather, than in his own. ,.., ,.•:...
* Paribus intervallis, omnia divina ab omnibus humanis distant Seneca Ac
Cons, ad Helviam. Cap. 9.
125
Saint Paul seems to consider it the end and
result of all useful applications of Scripture,
" that it can make the man of God perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works,"
(2 Tim. 3. 17) and is able according to his
previous assertion, " to make us wise unto
salvation."*
Other writings, it must be admitted, con*
stitute many useful and excellent' sources of
instruction; but the advantages, the convent
encies, and the ornaments of life, are the
highest objects designed by profane writers
in their discourses and arguments : had we
a clear insight into their design, we should
avail ourselves of their endeavours to facilitate
the pursuits of their readers. But it is to
the Scriptures alone that there is occasion
to apply; with the attainment or neglect of
which, is respectively associated eternal bliss,
or endless torments. Whatever it is the
Christian's duty to believe or to practice, is
to be acquired from a just and well-directed
knowledge of the Bible alone. But it must
be remarked, that to understand the Scrip
tures aright, illustrations are to be drawn by
diligent perusal, from various other writings
also. The doctrines of that Book should
therefore be the Christian's chief study ; with
a right eprnprehensipn of -.which, all other
* 2 Timothy, 3, 15—QtQitM «r ruhtfat.
126
books are not requisite to salvation, and under
an ignorance of which, all other books are
insufficient.
Had Saint Peter's vision been a reality,
under the influence of hunger, he would
scarcely have ranged abroad to hunt the
desart or the forest for game, when the vessel
descended to him from heaven, containing in
itself all manner of four-footed beasts and
other objects of appetite, attended with a
commanding invitation—" Arise ! Peter, kill
and eat."—Acts 10. 11, 12, 33. » J
Thus, what Christian, eager for divine
sustenance, one who hungers and thirsts
after righteousness, would glean from human
authors those divine truths, sparingly distri
buted through them, when God has caused
one Volume to descend to us from heaven,
containing within itself a virtual collection of
whatever is suited to his intellectual taste, or
calculated to satisfy his spiritual appetite!
The Christian's chief esteem is due to a book
so comprehensive; and as all other books may
Be without danger set aside, being rendered
void or unnecessary by its superior excellence,
so the distinguishing antonomasia is justified,
which confers upon it the eminent and exclu
sive title of The Bible, or The Book, derived
from the Greek *«&«, and to which term the
127
Hebrews have a corresponding expression,
applied to the same matchless volume.
The Bible sufficiently abounds with precepts
of virtue, and motives to advocate it ; if the
contents of that Sacred Book are rightly be
lieved and maturely considered.
It is a mistake to suppose that a large system
of ethics, divided according to the nice pres
criptions of the logician, and methodically fin
ished with definitions, divisions, distinctions,
and syllogisms, is requisite or sufficient to make
men virtuous. Many of our moralists write
as if they believed, that virtue and grammar
were to be attained with equal ease and by a
similar process. To advocate virtue or to dis
courage vice, by influential motives, is no part
of their system ; nor do they attempt to exer
cise a moral influence on the minds and man
ners of men : they address themselves to con
test the title and precedence of ethical points;
topics wholly without the sphere of vice, or the
attraction of virtue. They are more carefu
to assert their method, than the prerogative of
virtue above vice; more solicitous how to ad
just their chapters, than their readers' actions;
and are more industrious to impress their doc
trines on our memories than on our affections :
in a word, they are better calculated to teach us
how to dispute of our passions, than with them
128
Actually to possess one of the virtues, is
better than the speculative knowledge of
them all. The geographer may be able
to discourse theoretically of the dimension,
situation, motion or stability, of the whole
terrestrial globe; to describe on its surface
the zones, climates, and parallels; to enume
rate the various names and etymologies of
its diversified regions; to show the extent,
the confines, the figure, or the divisions of
all the dominions and provinces it contains:
but of the man who has accumulated a
knowledge of the whole earth, the monarch
who is possessed but of one kingdom, has
greatly the advantage.
The great master of philosophy, Aristotle,
is less to be objected to, because with more
perspicuity, he combines a smaller share of
pedantry; and favoured, perhaps, by his
interpreters, has not been fastidiously nice in
the method and arrangement observed in his
ethical writings : and, indeed, little theory is
requisite to the attainment of virtue ; without
it, virtue may be rightly understood and
cordially put itf practice.
The particular occurrences of life are so
•nearly infinite, that to specify them distinctly
would require an equally indefinite accumu
lation of rules: but to apply and extend
129
the principles of virtue to those occurrences,
through the aid of analogy, may be accom
plished by the light of reason or discretion.
Thus the single luminary at the pole is a
sufficient guide through all the diversified
courses of navigation.
There are luminaries and stars in the hea
vens, obvious to the sight of all men, and which
diffuse their beams sufficiently to enlighten
their paths. By the aid of a perspective glass
of extraordinary power, I have beheld nearly
a hundred stars in the constellation of the
Pleiades, where no more than six are ordina
rily observed ; and I have frequently discerned
in the galaxy, and in other cloudy places of
the firmament, numberless stars eluding the
eye unaided, and yet receive from heaven no
more light to aid my travels, than other men
enjoy.
Thus the grand principles in the science of
ethics, are obvious to the apprehension of all
men, and usually afford them much light and
much direction : but the numerous specula
tions of ethical writers, though productive of
some entertainment, afford us little peculiar
light, which is useful in the direction of our
moral course.
Virtue was perhaps never practised more
successfully, than before men had begun to
ISO
talk of its definition. Many celebrated cha
racters who grace the pages of secular history,
and whom the Sacred Records have ennobled,
suggested the precepts of moral virtue by their
examples, before any system of ethics had
been composed.
The alchymist has accurate notions of the
nature of gold, but lives in poverty ; while
the coffers of the merchant are filled with the
real treasure, although he never beheld either
mine or furnace.
The grand precepts of morality, are as pro
lific seeds, which industriously cultivated, will
bring forth fruits, productive of other seeds.
I do not deny, that many dissuasive argu
ments may be found in voluminous moral
works against vice, or that many others might
be collected in commendation of virtue, which
are not extant in the Bible; but a skilful
reader may find in that heavenly Book, ar
guments respecting virtue and vice, which
escape the notice of ordinary persons. Some
may resemble a pearl of great price, which
far excels those of inferior magnitude; and
others may comprise within themselves many
subordinate considerations, which are, as
numerous pieces of silver coin, when com
pared with a piece of gold, of the same
magnitude.
131
Human authors in their persuasive dis
courses are accustomed to indulge in orna
ment, or to expatiate in amplification ; and
to exhaust their arguments drawn from com
mon-place sources : yet as they fail to carry
their influence to the inmost recesses of
thought and sentiment, they seldom accom
plish the reformation of the author, and still
less frequently that of the reader.
The primitive ages of the Church on the
other hand, render a magnificent and convin
cing testimony, that the Scriptures although
destitute of many embellishments which are
common to human compositions, yet possess
an influence, which when duly entertained,
has raised virtue to a pitch of excellence, to
advanceitto which, philosophy dared not aim.
Pertinent and influential arguments res*
pecting virtue and vice, are few in number :
and persuasive discourses on moral topics
may be refined and ramified to an indefinite
extent. Yet how far soever the boughs may
extend, the knot lies in a little compass : and
the analyzer who shall penetrate the defence
with which popular language encompasses
the substance of such compositions, will find
on dividing the shells, that the kernels are
nearly alike. What this writer compares
to one thing, that writer likens to another.
132
Those persons who are ungrateful to God
for his goodness, by some compared to swine,
who eat the acorns, without looking to the
tree they fall from ; are by others compared
to cattle, who drink of the stream, without
considering the fountain from which it flows.
Virtue and vice are thus presented to us
in various habiliments, they are thrown into
changeable attitudes, and placed in different
lights ; and the novelty and diversity of their
appearance contribute, it must be admitted,
to engage the attention, and to amuse the
imagination. Yet in persons of deep dis
cernment and reflection, they inconsiderably
influence the impressions, under which virtue
and vice are entertained.
, Such persons will not be liable to take
exceptions at the Author of the Sacred Writ
ings, because the motives of action, suggested
in them are ancient, familiarly known, or
often repeated : for where this is the case
their efficacy is also repeated. Would it be
esteemed consistent for a physician to decline
the exhibition of mithridate, because it was
a well known medicine, that it was nothing
new, and celebrated for its cures many ages
sirjce? Is bread the less nutritious, or is its
use declined, because its discovery as some
suppose, was cotemporary with Adam, and
133
because it has since become the most usual
food of all ages and of all nations ?
It is true there may be repetitions of the
same arguments where a return of the same
vices demanded the same opposition. But it
must be considered that the rare occurrence of
ponderous considerations in the science of
ethics, rendered unavoidable the alternative
of repeating the same, although perhaps in
a different form, or of sacrificing utility to
novelty. The fastidious taste of those per
sons who cannot endure the reiterated em
ployment of the same truths, might with
equal reason be offended to see a soldier use
a sword ; because he himself and legions
many ages before his time, had constantly
made use of that weapon : and might with
as much propriety be displeased that a general
should encourage his army by representing
to them honour, duty, spoil, necessity, as
motives to engage the enemy with enthusiasm,
because he was accustomed to use those topics
at the head of his army, as often as. he had
occasion to lead it forward to tile fight.
I cannot here withhold the remark, that from
the consideration of God's infinite knowledge^
of His supremacy as a lawgiver to the whole
creation, the same truths* counsels, exhorta
tions, and dissuasions, very generally exercise
134
and ought always to possess a far different
influence and efficacy over the mind of a
Christian reader, when he finds them in the
Holy Scriptures, than if he should meet with
the same in the books of heathen moralists,
though learned and eloquent.
Those who hold the great writers of anti
quity in so much honour, and who read the
compositions of those among them which are
distinguished by the most successful investi
gation of truth, with the respect due to the
illuminated understandings they ascribe to
them ; on comparing their systems with a
book promulgated by an Omniscient enditer,
ought in all consistency, to proportion their
reverence to the claims of their respective
authors. The wisest of mankind are not
exempt from the imperfection of human
nature : and the assertion of Elihu is appli
cable to them also, that they are but of
yesterday, and know little or nothing. In
reading the most illustrious human authors
therefore, caution will suggest to the inquirer
that he is liable to be deceived by the errors
of their compositions : and undergoes a dou
ble labour, the one, in investigating the sense;
the other, in examining the truth of what they
deliver. In perusing the Scriptures, we are
relieved from the latter of these obstructions :
135
for if we discover the sense of a text in Scrip
ture, we are then possessed of a truth ; being
never deceived by the Sacred Volume, unless
on presuming on the full apprehension, of
what is not clearly understood.
When I find the vanity of the world pro
claimed and reduced to a just estimation, by
one who was not ignorant of all the delights
and glories of it, his testimony operates con
viction. But I am affected in a far different
manner on hearing the same truth asserted
by a person abandoned to misanthropy ;
withheld by his circumstances from all inter
course with the pleasures of life, who needs
little philosophy to despise a world of which
he judges by the scanty share, the narrowness
of his condition allows him in the joys of it.
The assertions of such a man respecting the
world, are as those of a blind man, respecting
an African ; he may truly style him dark and
destitute of beauty, but it would be a mark
of easy credulity to think him such on the
testimony of so incompetent a witness.
When God himself is pleased to reveal
what is vice or virtue, sublime or despicable,
truth or falsehood, happiness or misery, I
acquiesce more unreservedly in His decisions,
than I do in those of a human author, who
not exempted from frailties and passions, is
136
both obnoxious to mistake, and is therefore
liable to the hazard of deceiving others. It
is hence perfectly consistent, that to slight
the dictates of Scripture, should be esteemed
as an aggravated offence, on the ground of
their being communicated on divine authority.
Our Saviour gave the precedence to the
Ninevites, above them that repented not at
his preaching, because he was greater than
Jonah. Hence, although I have formerly
perused with some attention the systems of
ethics, yet, considering their authority as
limited, and that the penalties of sin are not
inseparably annexed to human prescriptions,
I must confess that I find myself scarcely
sensible of this influence.
• With some confidence in my own judgment
and discretion, I frequently assume the liberty
of questioning the reasonableness of what hu
man writers, whether philosophers or fathers,
are pleased to assert ; and in exercising this
privilege, I have found those specious and
boasted allegations, the apothegms of sages,
the placets of philosophers, the examples of
eminent persons, the fanciful similies, the
quaint allegories, and acute sentences of men
of fine imagination, these topics I have
found such two-edged weapons, that they are
often as applicable to falsehood as to truth,
137
and may by ready ingenuity be brought
equally to countenance contrary assertions.
To a man whose restless curiosity leads his
inquiries to all times and nations, the duties
which nature has taught will be admitted :
but in their technical systems, moralists will
appear little more than fencers with wit, I
mean those who have any, for their popular
topics are so uncertain in their foundation,
that little can be built on them that an equally
able antagonist may not as plausibly contro
vert. And I fear it is too generally experienced
that the sophistry of our corruptions is acute
enough to elude whatever is pressed as a duty
when inconvenient to themselves.
The requirements of Scripture come to me
otherwise recommended : conscious of their
divine authority, enjoined by the " Father of
Spirits," (Heb. 12. 9) who has an undoubted
right to enact laws, and whose fiat makes them
just; who can urge their observance by the
terrors of eternal death : here to dispute is
peril, and to disobey is perdition : my uncer
tain wanderings are at an end : a place of.
security is in view, and there I cast anchor.
Unhesitating obedience to his orders is the
line marked out, and the commanding enun
ciation, " Thus saith the Lord," secures my
acquiescence more than a whole dialogue of
K
138
of Plato, or an epistle of Seneca. I therefore
delight to build my ethics, as I do my creed,
upon a rock ; and esteem nothing that is not
read in the Scriptures, according to its strict
and proper sense, or what is not plainly deducible
from them, to be requisite to salvation,
or indispensably obligatory either in reference
to faith or practice.
Hence I am guilty of no inconsistency in
preferring to study the Will of God chiefly in
that Book, wherein alone I believe it to be
revealed. Acknowledging as a justly influen
tial motive His right to exact my obedience,
there is the greater reason for carefully distin
guishing what God in reality asserts, from
what man would represent him to say. If I
allow myself this liberty in discerning the text
of Scripture from the writings of our ordinary
interpreters, to whose comments, for reasons
elsewhere assigned, I cannot concede the
claim to the highest degree of merit ; and if
I think myselfjustified in assuming this liberty
in reference to the fathers of the church, who
demand even a greater measure of respect,
there is not I trust any occasion to inform
Theophilus, that as to the writings of all other
moralists, I take the liberty to approve or
disapprove them according to the dictates of
impartial reason ; or to assure him, that I
139
frequently apprehend that their harapgues
will scarcely pass for demonstrations with
those inquirers, whose caution and nice sense
of honour excites them to indignation against
falsehood, and abhor deceit, although an
attempt may be made to cheat them into
what they approve of. Such men choose to
act as rational Christians, as well in reference
to the inducements, as to the nature of their
actions. >. : .•< i-i•i 1: .;•*/
It is among the thirteen articles of the
Jewish creed, that the expressions of the law
or Pentateuch were divinely inspired : and it
is a saying of the Rabbins, that whole mounr
tains of doctrine hang on each tittle of the
law. A saying not altogether so hyperbolical
as a careless reader might imagine,
I shall not adduce in proof of this, the
mysteries which have been supposed to exist
in the wonderful accentuation of the ten
commandments in the original ; for some of
their more temperate doctors have to me
freely confessed it to be a conjecture, as
embarrassing to them as to ourselves. The
Jews have also ingeniously reduced the whole
law it© six hundred and thirteen precepts,
affirmative and negative, coinciding with the
number of letters in the Decalogue ; intimating
thereby that every law which is made for the
140
(direction of man, is virtually or by inference
comprised in them. But this Rabbinical
notion or caprice, I shall not adduce to my
present purpose: it is, however, so well
known to those who are conversant with
Jewish authors, that I have sometimes sus
pected that from it originated the conceit
entertained by so many of our divines, that
all the precepts relating to any part of the
whole duty of man are by just consequences
deducible from the Decalogue. My opinion
however, that the Scriptures are fertile in
doctrine, is not grounded in such questionable
and proofless conceits.
Thus for I would nevertheless urge this
branch of my argument : that the clear and
resplendent truths with which Scripture evi
dently abounds, are open to the observation
of all. I will go further and assert, that to a
diligent and anxious reader, there are many
precepts exhibited, many truths asserted,
many errors confuted, and many mysteries
intimated, in the very expressions of Holy
Writ, which a heedless and unconcerned
reader is not accustomed to notice.
The expression which is applied to the
Supreme Being, that " He covereth Himself
with light as with a garment," (Psalm 104. 2)
is exemplified in the Scriptures ; where the
141
very phrases that clothe the sense are not only
enlightened, but often mysterious. The first
words that in the Old Testament God is
recorded to have spoken are these,—" Let
there be light," "fiN VF Ye-he aor.*—Gen. 1.3,
The apostle assures us, " that whatsoever
things were written," even in the Old Testa
ment, "were written for our learning;" {Rom.
15. 4) and some places of Scripture so far
abound with materials of instruction, that
a striking contrast exists between them and
human writings; the former containing more
substance than words, the other more words
than substance.
The very flowers of rhetoric, which flourish
in that favoured climate, like the helianthus,
that turns to the sun, possess in themselves
the inestimable virtue of pointing to truth, that
brilliant sun of the Scriptural hemisphere..
The tree of life, which is described as
flourishing in the new Jerusalem, not only
afforded seasonable fruit, but even its " leaves
also were for the healing of the nations."—?
Rev. 22. 2.
* Longinus adduces this celebrated passage, as an example of that sublimity,
which is as a sound returned from the inward greatness of the soul • Tj riiivUt
i$>;, fifyx\oQzanni! W^i^m ; and says that the conceptions of the Jewish
lawgiver were worthy of the power of the Deity. His words are those—
V> rSt 'UiHalm ltefuti]tit, i»x ' ruX&* «'"'{• wtuUt fni rsv iiisu "iutufut xis%
vhv «|i«v t%*£net, xif\i$witvt fuQus iv rn iisZoXn ytff^M rui top&v, " E/irsi> »
0iJf." f tir) rl ; " yiiirtv f£i, xa) syiriTi - ynuta yn, *«i iytv{\n." The Editor.
142
It has been the custom of some persons in
the last age, as well as in the present, to
depreciate the Old Testament, by assuming
that to Christians, the New Testament is suffi
cient as a guide and instructor. In reference
to this bold assertion, I am at present disposed
to be of opinion, that the doctrines promul
gated in the New Testament, combined with
the light of nature* which is rather supposed
than excluded by the Gospel, comprise what
ever is absolutely necessary to salvation ; and
Consequently that many divines both of the
Roman and of the reformed churches, are at
least inconsiderate in pressing the observance
Of many things enjoined in the OldTestament,
as laws properly so called, which to Christians
are not obligatory, on the ground of their
being there enjoined : requirements, which
perhaps were never binding unless on the
Hebrew nation, and on some classes of Jewish
proselytes. '
Generally speaking, it may be difficult to
prove any duty to be indispensably necessary
to Christians, to which neither the New Tes
tament nor the light of nature bear their
testimony. Yet of duties grounded on this
authority, the Old Testament may furnish us
with more particular and explicit information,
and may often display in a clearer view the
U3
mysteries of our religion, by a more express
and copious enunciation of them. This ob
servation might be easily exemplified, by
reference to the Sacred Volume.
Hence the Old Testament becomes a store
house of illustration for what is to be believed
for the credenda in divinity ; though it may
not perhaps be absolutely necessary as to what
is to be practised as to the agenda. •. : '
I am now led to the important consideration,
that the events and personages spoken of in
the Old Testament, its expressions, as well as
its topics, are so frequently referred to in the
New, that there is scarcely a page contained
in the latter, to the better understanding of
which the study of the former is not either
absolutely necessary, or at least highly con
ducive. Divine instruction resembles rivers
and seas, which seem to affect the same
channels they themselves originally formed-
Had God been pleased to instruct us a&
He did Jonas, by the shadow of a weed,
(Jon. 4. 6) it had been our duty to acquiesce :
how much rather then should we be obedient
to the divine teaching, when the Scriptures in
which He condescends to address us possesses
so glorious an antetype, as the sanctuary which
contained the Law of God !—where the two
golden cherubim, composed of the most pre
144
cious materials, and harmonizing like the two
associated Testaments, looked towards each
other, both being intent on that mercy-seat
which typified the Messiah !—Ex. 25. 16 to 21.
There is reason therefore not only with
acquiescence, but with gratitude, to esteem
the divine appointment of the Scriptures to
be the medium, through which the Holy
Spirit invariably enlightens and fertilizes His
universal church. For the medium is trans
lucent, and it was ordained by Him, whose
blessing can render it efficacious, to transmit
the beams of divine favour upon us with an
enlivening energy. In His hands, every means
must be successful ; without His blessing, no
means of grace can prosper.
Among those who erroneously consider the
Bible an inferior source of edification, when
compared with other books of morality and
devotion, there are, for I freely confess my
opinion to you, Theophilus, some persons
eminently religious : and lest their example
should tempt you to follow their steps, you
will I trust pardon me for adding to what I
have already said on this subject, one horta
tory sentence; pressing on your attention,
that it is not only a commendable practice,
but that it is more productive of edification
than many persons apprehend, to read daily
145
in an appointed order, some portion of the
Holy Scriptures ; and uniformly to persevere
in so doing, even although no sudden or
sensible benefit should be perceived to accrue
from it; for Naaman dipped himself six times
in the river Jordan, without being cured.—
2. Kings, 5. 14. Perseverance alone can avail
to overcome the discouragements arising from
the darkness of some texts, as well as from
the influence of those who throw up the Scrip
tures, in despair of understanding them ; and
further from the opposition which will be
rendered, particularly at first, by the great
enemy to the Author and the design of the
Scriptures.
A distempered palate is common to most
diseases, which receives no pleasure from the
most agreeable flavors : yet refreshment must
be received, and is efficacious to the purposes
of nourishment and strength, although it may
seem insipid, or even disgusting. Like the
Ethiopian, (Acts 8, 30, 31.) the disciple of
Christ must peruse many texts which he
understands not, when he reads them : and
although at first, he may not be able to
develop the meaning contained in some por
tions of God's Word, it is at least becoming,
to imitate the holy mother of Christ, when
the sayings which He spake unto them were
146
hot understood : " His Mother kept all these
sayings in her heart."—Luke 11. 50, 51.
Our Lord graciously solicits our acquies
cence in His ministry to our spiritual wants :
we with Saint Peter are unconscious of its
efficacy, and He would address to us a similar
reply " what I say, thou knowest not now,
but shalt know hereafter."—John, 13. 7. Our
memory should admit the Word of God with
alacrity, though no further known than as
His word : our faculties should render it
hospitable entertainment, until the under
standing is enabled to improve the acquain
tance. The apostle's motive to hospitality
might here bear influence : " Be not forgetful
to entertain strangers, for thereby some have
entertained angels unawares."—Heb. 13. 9.
A certain mental hospitality may be ex
ercised towards those texts of Scripture we
are unacquainted with; it may thus frequently
occur to uS, as with Abraham and Lot, to
receive greater guests than we imagine, (Gen.
18 $ 19) and who when their true condition
appears, may recompense our respect, by
showering blessings on our path, and rescuing
us from the company and the destiny of the
wicked.
If in. the times of pagan darkness their
suspicions and malignant oracles were pre
U1
served arid reverenced, many of which
proceeded from tlie prince of darkness, and
the father of lies ; it would be a just cause of
disgrace to Christians, to refuse a place in
our memories, or an attentive perusal to those
living Oracles ;* those Oracles of God, who
is the '* Father of lights," the essential prin
ciple of truth, who cannot lie.—James, 1. 17.
Titus, 1. 2. • :
The most perplexing and enigmatical
passages in this point of view, possess an
advantage : for they become useful ad moni
tors of our weakness, and welcome occasions
to evince how great a reverence we feel for
the Word of God, on the single ground of
its being so. " ''" ,' "-.,,i,'J'i;
In the progress of a sttidy, ruinous <tfftfee
malicious designs of Satan against our salva
tion, he will seldom fail to : disturb ' us' ; by
throwing obstructions and discouragements
in our way. If maturely Considered,51 this
will rather animate our perseverance, than
deter us from it: they will be considered the
efforts of the Spirit of Christ newly forriied
within us, or may be compared to the vehe
ment cries and distortions which preceded the
expulsion of the unclean spirit; (Mark, 1. 26)
such parting ceremonies not being unusual
with the retiring demon, who finding himself
*A«y« ?«»J«—Acts 7,38.
148
on the point of being expelled, "hath great
wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but
a short time."— Rev. 12. 12. " But although
the God of peace who will bruise Satan under
our feet," (Rom. 16, 20) should previously try
us with desertions, and the absence of all
consolation in the study of the Scriptures ;
let it not on that account be deserted, but
let the disciple of Christ persevere in the
constant and faithful use of all the means of
grace. As the moon when she suffers an
eclipse, forsakes not her orbit or motion, but
by pursuing her unretarded course, regains
the irradiation she had been deprived of.
The Word of God, that deathless principle
through which Saint Peter says, we are born
again, (1 Peter, 1.1, 3) is by an accurate
resemblance compared to seed, which we
know may for a long time appear dead and
buried in the ground, and yet afterwards
spring and grow up to a plentiful harvest.
If our frailties, of which Scripture renders
us acutely sensible, do not deter our appli
cation to its pages, no degree of proficiency
should be considered as rendering our further
attention to them unnecessary ; realising the
remark of king David, " I will never forget thy
precepts, for with them thou hast quickened
me"—Psalm 119, 93.
149
The Word of God is not to be as an active
medicine, which is taken occasionally to pro
duce a violent operation ; it is with much more
propriety designated, "the bread of life," the
food of the soul, in which sense it may be
literally said, " that man liveth not by bread
alone, but by every word that proceedeth
out of the mouth of God."—Mat. 4. 4. Our
yesterday's meal, though abundant, will not
supply or satisfy the hunger of to-day ; and
to-morrow there will be equally occasion for
refreshment, which must be daily repeated,
as long as we continue in these perishable
cottages of clay. So it is in reference to our
spiritual necessities : the soul does not require
to be agitated by occasional and violent
emotions, but requires to be sustained by a
frequent and constant recurrence of the means
of grace. Good health is generally accompa
nied with frequent returns, and with strength
of appetite for food : thus the best Christians
and the greatest proficients in the knowledge
of Scripture, as may be instanced in king
David, have the most eager desire to contem
plate the Word of God, the food of the soul.*
The most ardent spirit of piety, unsupported
and neglected, is liable to decline and expire :
nor have we any just cause to repine at our ob
ligation to assiduity in reading the Scriptures ;
150
fof.a greater number of circumstances cambine
to recompense a serious study of them,
than concur to demand our application to the
Sacred Writings. Both the substance and the
expression will be found on experience, amply
to justify the comparison of them to that
aromatic fruit, of which not only the kernel
is a nutmeg, but the involving integument
which contains it, is a fragrant spice.
The inexhaustible fulness of the law occa
sioned that encomium on it expressed by the
Rabbins, " turn it over and over again, for all
is i» it," pa ^: viH m %m to im * in
accordance with which, the person who trans
lates the Arabian apothegms into Hebrew,
thus pronounces : " There proceedeth not a
true sentence out of the mouths of this world's
wise men, that is not intimated in our law."
The common occurences of life frequently
require the application of texts of Scripture:
for this, it is not sufficient to have the sense
of the Holy Writing laid up in our memories,
but to apply them, demands a certain facility;
we should not only have them in possession
but in readiness. When David was distressed
by his mortal enemies, he took Goliah's sword
from near the ephod, (1 Sam.2l .9) and wore it
whithersoever he went. Thus Christians whose
spiritual peace is invaded by the adversary of
*Ph* avoth. Cap. V
151
their souls, should not only be anxious to have
an armoury well furnished with weapons of
a heavenly temper, but eareful to wear "the
sword of the spirit," (Eph. 6. 1?) always by
their side, to ward and thrust with on all
occasions.
The usefulness of Scripture, for that is the
point at present under discussion, cannot be
known without such an acquaintance with the
sacred text, as to preclude the necessity of
books of reference, which are seldom near
enough, to prevent us from being foiled by
the father or the champions of lies.
You perceive I would invite you to become
ready in the Scriptures : for this I must
remark, that the texts of Scripture inter
change light with each other; and every new
degree of learning in the Sacred Volume, is
not only an acquisition of so much, but an
instrument in the hands of the intelligent to
acquire more ; to this I must add, that the
Bible contains so inexhaustible a. fund of
divine truth, that the last hour of a good
Christian's long and industrious life, will stijl
leave in it unexplored mysteries. This is not
pnly true, but it is also true that the doctrines
of it, that are of importance often meet that
opposition in our depraved nature, that even
those passages that require but few perusals
152
to understand, require many to be duly
impressed. We seldom forget, what it is
agreeable to remember: and truths do not
impress our minds, in the ratio of their value,
or of their weight.
In quicksilver, every substance is sustained
on its surface: in that ponderous fluid nothing
will sink deeply but gold. Our partial me
mories on the contrary, subservient to feeling
and imagination, submit to be deeply pene
trated by light and trivial images, and too
often give to objects of the last importance,
a superficial reception.
The Word of Christ must not be admitted
as a passenger, or parsimoniously entertained
in our minds, but must be assiduously invited
to take up its abode there : must dwell there,
and that richly. The Word, which SaintJames
pronounces to be able to save our souls, is
compared by him to a cion, inserted into a
tree : it must first be incorporated into the
stock, which will afterwards bear fruit accord
ing to the improved quality of the graft. In
a word, the human disposition is so adverse
to admit, and so liable to deface religious
impressions, that there is the greatest occasion
throughout life to be conversant in those pre
cepts, that teach us to pass it in true devotion
to our Maker.
153
But it must be lamented, that it is incident
to the froward nature of man, and not in a
lower degree his error, to cavil at God's
method in prosecuting his intentions; and as
if man were wiser than his Maker, to criminate
his conduct in his dispensations.
< Even that excellent person, the most glorious
of all virgins and of mothers, who to the latest
ages must be deservedly called blessed, in
curred her Divine Son's reprehension for an
intimated offer to alter his purposed method,
in manifesting his divine power.—John, 2. 3, 4.
But God is too just to his attributes, and too
merciful to us, to degrade his Omniscience so
far, as to suffer himself to be swayed against
the dictates of it, by such fallible and perverse
tutors as ourselves.
His goodness is concerned too much in our
instruction to submit the arrangement of His
Word to our imaginations.
To attain his own ends, he resorts to his
own means and instruments, without requiring
our imperfect sight in the election of them.
Guided, by unfathomable wisdom in provid
ing for man's instruction, through a gracious
though a misapprehended constancy, he per
sists in enforcing what he has ordained for
that purpose. Those who are at present dis
posed to cavil at the arrangement or the style
154
of Scripture, would take exceptions at any
other that could be devised. Some specific
plan must necessarily be adopted, and such
is the unimaginable diversity of humours,
judgments, and prepossessions, that as some
are ready to express their surprise at the pre
sent state of the Scriptures, why they are thus,
and not otherwise ; so under whatever form
they could be promulgated, others might be
found, ready to obtrude upon us the same
inquiry.
. It may be justly doubted, whether the
Israelites murmured in a greater measure at
Pharaoh in Egypt, or at Moses in the wilder
ness : and the children complained of by their
companions in the market-place, (Mat. 11.
16 to 19) have had successors or predecessors
in all ages, who have been of the disposition
of those Jews, who attributed the extreme
observance of virtue to the great enemy of
all virtue, and more than Solomon's humility,
to the vices he designed it to destroy.
. But the great Physician of mankind is too
compassionate and too wise, to permit his
distracted patients to prescribe their own
course of medicine, or to discompose, and to
throw into disorder his profound and myste
rious ordinances, for the purpose of obviating
our cavils, or of soothing our perversefiess.
Appointments, whose wisdom engages the
attention, and exacts the admiration of those
heavenly (1 Pet. 1. 12) and unconstrained
spirits, who have scarcely in a greater measure
the advantage over us in their refulgent power*
of understanding, than in the means they
possess of continuing to exalt them. Hence
our Lord refused to come down from the
cross on the mandate of the chief priests and;
scribes, whose malice brought him therer
notwithstanding their declaration, that on,
those terms they would believe on Him.™
Mat. 27. 41.
Many persons are too apt to indulge the
idea, that they would be won to their duty
if it were taught or enforced in the way
which they could dictate. But I would call
to their remembrance that it was a person in
hell, who proposed other means of preaching,
repentance than those ordained in the Scrip
tures; and that it was a beatified spirit in,
heaven, who referred to the Scriptures for
convincing arguments for reformation, declar
ing, , . " that if men heard not looses and the
prophets, neither would they be persuaded t
though one arose from the dead to preach
to them/'—Luke, 15. 31.
Had I addressed myself to a person pf Jes*
intelligence than Theophilus, or $ven to
156
readers in general, I should have added to
what is here advanced respecting the several
exceptions against the Scriptures, an earnest
exhortation to all persons, to decline as far as
they discreetly can, even to listen to objections
of whatever sort, or under whatever disguise,
against the Sacred Writings ; unless their
abilities and their leisure for literary research,
should afford them a well grounded hope of
being able clearly to vindicate that Heavenly
Volume, from the plausible and subtle insinu
ations, suggested by infidelity and sophistry.
It is neither necessary nor possible for every
private Christian to know the opinions of all
dissenters respecting the Holy Scriptures, or
their reasons for misinterpreting them : and in
acquiring a knowledge of the way to heaven, it
is not requisite to become informed of all those
paths, in which they that miss it wander. To
understand the road from Dover to London,
it is of no use to be intimately acquainted with
those cross roads that lead elsewhere than to
the metropolis: to know the road is sufficient,
and it is not required in every traveller to be
a geographer.
It is in my opinion the height of impru
dence in any person of ordinary attainments,
to run a very probable hazard of unsettling
his faith, and not an improbable one of
157
subverting it, merely to indulge a needless
curiosity, an itch, which is equally gratified
and exasperated by the ordinary mode of
relieving it.
In joining a profane or licentious conversa
tion against the orthodox faith, your design
may seem innocent—you may resolve against
bei ng influenced by what you hear, or propose
to yourself entertainment from a display of
wit and novelty—admiring the beauty of the
arrow in its flight towards yourself: the point,
I admit, may not penetrate a vital part, but I
must aver, that such conversations are seldom
harmless. The experience of many has too
frequently proclaimed this: they have either
contributed to weaken their faith, to abate the
ardour of their devotion, to lessen their reve
rence of the Word of God, or to suggest some
strange and disquieting scruples, which it is
much easier to confute than to silence. During
infectious times when the plague has prevailed,
it has been customary with physicians more
strictly to forbid the smaller excesses and ir
regularities of diet, and in the use of meats
not easily digestible, and whatever is apt to
breed disease ; because every trivial fever
becomes, through the malignity of the air,
liable to terminate in the plague. Thus in
the present times, when the fatal distemper
158
t>f irreligion is so common, and spreads so
fast, I trust it will not appear unseasonable
to advise every one who tenders the quiet
possession of his faith, to be more than ordi
narily cautious in venturing on any books or
company, that are calculated to lower their
veneration of the Scriptures; because, by the
contagion of profaneness, where opinions in
the smallest measure injurious to the Holy
Volume are entertained in the mind, they are
prone to degenerate into irreligion. But here
t desist, lest you should think that I invade
the office of the preacher.
159
&De 3Bigt)tl) anli last (SWjecttom
ON THE ORNAMENTS OF SCRIPTURE.
I am now arrived, Theophilus, at that part
of my treatise, where it will be proper to
take into consideration an important objection
against the style of the Scriptures, which to
a person steadily occupied in the pursuit of
wisdom, would seem trivial ; but is urged as
of moment by its skilful adversaries, particu*
larly those, who careless of the higher faculties,
make it a source of amusement to exercise
and gratify their imagination. The objection
is this : that the Scriptures are so unadorned
with the flowers of rhetoric, and so destitute
of eloquence and elevation, that they seldom
prove efficacious upon intelligent readers;
that many persons of genius and rank, and par
ticularly statesmen, either despise or neglect
them.
The story of the cardinal who flourished in
the last age, is well known, (nor do I fear to
repeat it in this place) who said, that once
indeed he had read the Bible, but that if he
were to do so again it would lose him all his
latmity. And among those who esteemed
160
themselves great orators, and lived in the
same age and country with the cardinal, the
complaint was not unfrequent, that reading
the Bible, untaught them the purity of the
Roman language, and corrupted their Cicero
nian style. And it now occurs to my memory,
that a prince of some celebrity, in conversation
with me, in no obscure company, maintained
an opinion respecting the style of Scripture,
in comparison with which the cardinal's scorn
was even complimentary. I have too much
respect, however, for his other qualities to
associate his name with this animadversion.
Most happy would it be for our native
country, if those seas which so happily divide
it from this world's continent, could preserve
her separate from its vices; if they could
confine these petulant expressions to foreign
shores, and prevent our national faith from
being invaded by their hostile attacks. But
I fear it must be confessed, that the arrogant
custom of judging that Sacred Book, which
will ere long pass judgment on ourselves, if
not a native, is at least a denizen of England ;
and it is not without reluctance, that I ac
knowledge myself of the same country with
the man who is recorded to have solemnly
preferred one of the odes of Pindar to all the
psalms of David. To this I could add various
161
parallel instances, which I have myself been
grieved to witness, were I not inclined to the
opinion, that it is better to commit profane
sayings of this sort to their merited oblivion,
than to record them ; and that it is more for
the general good, that they should be sup
pressed, than divulged.
It is an ill compliment to human nature to
perpetuate the remembrance of such instances
of flagrant impiety; exclusively of which I must
remark, that the satisfaction some men receive
in gratifying their curiosity with such relations,
will scarcely account for the disposition exci
ted by them to imitate what others have dared.
Men are deterred from the commission of
some crimes, by the impression that they are
too frightful to be contemplated : and there
are others, against which legislators have
shown their wisdom in using the silence of
the laws, in preference to their threats.
Without adducing further instances of dis
graceful profaneness, I shall therefore assume
it as admitted, that there have been, and are
in the present times, too many persons of wit
and artifice, who have indulged their ima
gination in depreciating and degrading the
Holy Scriptures.
In regard to their alleged accusation, which
I am now to treat of, many arguments might
162
be readily adduced to confute it. But as many
of them are applicable to another branch of
my treatise, which relates more immediately
to other topics than to the style of Scripture,
I therefore decline dwelling on them so copi
ously in this place. But that you may with
the greater ease refer to the objection now
proposed, whatever may apply to it in the
following division of my treatise, I shall here
observe to you, that my answers to it may be
for the most part arranged under the five
following heads :
First—that as to many parts of the Scrip
tures, it was not requisite that they should be
adorned with rhetorical embellishments.
Secondly—that to those who read the Bible
only in translations, particularly in the vulgar
Latin version, it appears to have much less
beauty and propriety of expression than in
reality it possesses.
Thirdly—that from the diversity of opinions
men have, in regard to literary compositions,
particularly men of dissimilar habits, nations
and climates, many passages that we think
inelegant, may to another part of mankind
appear worthy of admiration.
Fourthly—that there are in Scripture very
numerous instances, in which the author has
thought fit to employ the ornaments of Ian
16$
guage; that these actually possess excellencies
which correspond with our ideas of elegance.
Lastly—that it is far from being consonant
with experience, that the style of Scripture
makes it unoperative on the generality of
readers, if they are not culpably indisposed
to receive impressions from it.
In regard to the first of these topics, you
may possibly remember what I have already
shown, that there are many parts of Scripture
in which it would have been improper to affect
an ornamented style ; it will therefore be the
less requisite to engage your attention to this
head. But I cannot omit to notice, that it
is freely conceded to writers of every descrip
tion, to adopt that mode of expression, which
is appropriate to the several professions and
subjects on which they may treat. With how
little reluctance do many of us dwell on the
compositions of lawyers, physicians and chymists,
though frequently dictated in terms as
harsh and uncourtly as if such inelegancies
were designed.
What reason then can be given for treating
the Sacred Writings with neglect and scorn,
because in some passages they speak of the
mysteries and other subjects of religion, in
a proper andjtheological style. Machiavel, I
remember, in the dedication of his "Del
164
Principe," acknowledges, not without reason,
to Lorenzo de Medici, to whom his book is
addressed, that he had not encumbered it
with lofty language and sounding words, nor
adorned it with any of those insinuating
ornaments usually adopted by other authors
in their writings ; and renders the following
reasons for the plainness of his style : " that
he was desirous, either that his work should
have no recommendation, or that its favour
able reception should rest solely on the
truth of the materials, and the dignity of the
subject."*
If a statesman, writing to a prince, could
with consistency use this language, in re
ference to a mere civil topic, how much
more reason is there to expect, that the least
adorned part of that Book should exact a
welcome, of which the truth is a direct
emanation from the supreme and essential
truth ; and of which the subject is no less im
portant and elevated, than eternal happiness
or eternal woe. If neither the plainness of
Machiavel's style, nor the prohibition of his
works by the Inquisition, can deter the Italian
critics from an assiduous and furtive perusal
of them, how will they stand excused who now
• Perche io ho voluto, o die veruna cosa la honori (la mia opera) o che. so*
lamante la verita della materia, et la gravita del soggetto la facia grata.
165
allege, as the sole plea of their contempt or
neglect of Scripture, the plain or unaffected
style of the Sacred Writings.
Secondly, as to the disadvantage of not read
ing the Scriptures in the original languages,
notwithstanding my former observations on
that topic, I must now resume it : for it must
excite the less surprise, that the style of
Scripture should not be respected according
to its merits, when it is considered that the
language of a Hebrew book is judged of by
a vulgar translation.
It is true that many protestant divines have
objected in many instances, without sufficient
cause, against our present translation, who
would find it. a difficult task to improve it.
It must be admitted, however, that it is in
many places harsh and inelegant ; and by a
partial and unsuccessful affectation of render
ing the original ad lileram, fails ih expressing
the Hebrew idiom, and widely departs from
the propriety of the Latin tongue. To adhere
literally to the original, injures the sense of
the composition, almost as universally as its
elegance ; rendering excellent expressions in
such ungraceful language, that if literary beau
ties were its only recommendation, readers
might with justice be discouraged from peru
sing it.
166
The saying of Mirandula may not without
propriety be applied to the present subject :
" that the Hebrews drink at the fountain of
information, the Greeks at the river, the
Latins at the pool."* The old French rhym
ing translation of Virgil has made the iEneid
not much more sublime, than Sternhold and
Hopkins have made the Psalms ; the author
of which was a travelled man, a courtier, and
a poet : his compositions, therefore, it may
be fairly assumed, a priori, contain polished
and fashionable language, according to the
style of expression in use at the time they were
written, however unpolished an appearance
they may sometimes bear in our own. The
opinion which the Eastern world entertain of
the sweet singer of Israel, appears from what
Kessaeus, the celebrated Mahometan writer
of the lives of the fathers, relates concerning
him : " thajt when Pavid sang, the hills, the
birds, and the beasts, accompanied him in
celebrating the praises of God."+
They entertain the belief of many fictions
respecting him, which are truly hyperbolical :
and they reckon David among the four great
prophets, Moses, Jesus, and Mahomet, com
pleting that number.
• K • Hcbr.Ti bibunt fontes, Grseci lives, J .:iti:ii paludes.
t Kesseus, . page 99. See psalm 114, 4. Psalm 19.
167
To represent the birds and beasts as singing
the glory of God, may be attributed to a
literal interpretation of figurative expressions
contained in the psalms, and of the prophet's
pathetic appeal to the inanimate creation, to
join with him in celebrating their common
Creator. Mahomet seems to have borrowed
from the psalms the following passage of the
Koran: " We reduced the mountains $q
comply with him, who should join with him
in praises morning and evening; the birds
also flock to him; all these are obsequious
to him."
The New Testament in general not being
originally composed in Hebrew, its writers,
being Hebrews, have chiefly written in a
manner which resembles the translation of
the Old Testament, and the style of the apo
cryphal authors and other Hebrews, writing
in the Greek language. These authors wrote
in what may be termed an Hebraic, rather
than an Attic Greek ; or, from frequently
referring to the septuagint version, they have
assumed a dialect, which, if it abound not
in actual Hebraisms, yet abounds with ex
pressions frequently occurring in Hebrew
writings, although seldom to be met with in
Greek authors; and if not actually to be called
the Hebraic style, very nearly resembles.it.
168
Whether the translations of the Old Testa
ment constitute of itself what the critics have
so much disputed of, under the name of lingua,
or dialectics Hellenistica, I would rather suggest
than decide. Of the style alluded to, our
opponents must necessarily be incompetent
judges, whether they meet with it in the New
or in the Old Testament; because they are
unacquainted with the original languages.
For there are in the idiom of all languages,
peculiar graces, which are either attenuated
or lost in a translation : as in transferring
essences from one vessel to another, the most
subtle and exquisite spirits are exhaled and
evaporate.
This is in a particular measure exemplified
in the sacred language which God has vouch
safed to dignify by his own expressions ; as it
possesses many, whose poignant meaning is
with no less difficulty to be rendered in another
language, than the dazzling brightness of the
sun, or the water of the diamond is to be
transferred to the canvass : and as it is distin
guished by many words and phrases, the
fulness and pregnant import of which, no
other language has terms to express.
Some of the Hebrew conjugations, as chiefly
those called Hiphil and Hilhpael, give signi
fications to verbs which, from the absence
169
of corresponding conjugations, western lan
guages cannot convey without a periphrasis ;
these are rarely so comprehensive as original
words. And I must here assert, that from not
taking this one grammatical truth maturely
into consideration, translators have not fully
understood or clearly displayed many pas
sages in the New Testament, in which the
Greek, from the want of those conjugations,
has given active or intransitive verbs respec
tively, a transitive or reciprocal signification.*
In proceeding to the third answer, many
passages of Scripture are accused of appear
ing inelegant to European judges. In reply
to which it may be justly asserted, that the
eastern eloquence differs widely from the wes
tern. In those purer climates, where learning
Avas a native, who is here but a denizen,, the
most cherished and admired compositions, if
judged by western rules of oratory, may
be considered destitute of genius. Their
dark and involved sentences, their figurative
and parabolical. discourses, their abrupt and
* The absurdity to which an ignorance of the original may lead, in censuring
the Scriptures, I bad once an occasion of observing in a commentator, who accused
StPaulof impropriety of speech, for writing, " a vobis diffamotus est scrmo," not
knowing that St. Paul wrote In Greek, he could not refrain from correcting him
for having written diffamutus est, instead of divulgates est.. Our translation,
has rightly rendered the passage, " From you sounded out the word."—£p' i/i2v
''Ivxtfltu i xiy&s It is to be found in the beginning of what is oridinarily
esteemed the First Epistle to the Thessalonians; but by the learned Grotius, in
his Paradoxes de Antichristo, is not improbably considered to be the Second.
M
170
dislocated expressions, which often leave the
sense at the mercy of conjectures — their
neglect of connecting transitions, which not
unfrequently obscures the method and cohe
rence of what they write, are imperfections
that their rhetoricians as generally counte
nance, as they are universally or unanimously
disapproved of by our critics. There is,
perhaps, little less disparity in the opinions
of the eastern and western literati, than in
their ways of writing: for their pens, (an
antetype as it were of the retrocession of the
Jews, and the advancement of the Gentiles
to divine favour) move from the right hand
towards the left : whereas we, with the Ethi
opians, who in this have been our imitators,
write from the left towards the right. Hence
to us they appear to write backwards, and to
them, we seem to do the same. > "
In regard to the opposite opinions, which
the eastern and western colonies of the sons
of Adam have entertained, as to elegance of
composition, one instance alone, from the
striking nature of it, may suffice ; and that
arises from the inordinate esteem in which
the Mahometans hold the language of the
Koran. A circumstance which cannot be
unknown to those, who are even moderately
versed in eastern history.
171
The ablest Arabian expositors gravely
assure us, that all the art of men and demons
could not deprive that book of its claim to
matchless perfection. Mahomet himself so
far exulted in its imagined excellence, that in
some instances he defies its opposers to equal
one surat or section of it ; and seems to make
this inimitable excellence an argument, that
it is not barely of human authority. When
the Saracens are pressed with the objection,
that their religion is destitute of attesting
miracles, they do not scruple to reply, that
had there been no other miracle to testify the
superiority of their religion to that taught by
the prophets, the Alcoran were sufficient;
being a lasting miracle of excellence in itself,
which no other miracle can equal.* How
captivating its tone of expression may be in
the original, must be left to the opinion of
those who are more skilful in the Arabic than
myself ; my other pursuits and studies having
in a great measure obliterated the knowledge
which I once had of that flourishing language.
The Koran has too many interpolations from
the Holy Scriptures, not to contain much to
be admired ; and this is an inducement to
• Et si nihil prater solum Alkoranum (adduxisset) 6atis hoc foret ad eximiam
excellentiam supra reliqua, quae prophetse adduxerunt : nam ille miraculum e»r,
quod in secula durat prs omnibus aliis miracuKs Hotting. Hist, Orient.
172
me the more frequently to cite it. But
notwithstanding this advantage, the ancient
Latin version of it, made under the direction
of the abbot PetrusClunacensis, and published
in the last century by Bibliander, would be
considered by our critics to possess not the
most distant claim to eloquence.*
. The recent translations I have seen of the
Koran in French, and of many parts of it in
the Latin language, have been laboriously
rendered by great scholars, and men well
versed in Arabic. The language of these
versions conforms very nearly to the eastern
original; and if you were to judge of it by
our ordinary rules of composition, instead of
extolling it for the superlative, you would
not admit it to possess the positive degree of
merit: you would think the style as destitute
of grace as the theology is of truth ; and your
astonishment would be as much excited by
the Saracens' admiration, as their admiration
is by the extolled compilation of Mahomet.
What I have perused of the literary pro
ductions of India, fall very far short of our
notions of excellence; but the literati of China
are still more obnoxious to our censure. Those
of their works that I have seen, though written
* The great critic Scaliger exclaims—" Deum immortalem! quam intpta
est vulgaris ilia, qmm habemus, interpretatio t"—epist. 362.
173
with great care by the authors, and translated
with no less care, by skilful interpreters, to an
ordinary European, seem rather ridiculous
than graceful.
But a few well known circumstances may
together be sufficient, in addition to what has
been said, to testify satisfactorily the different
standards by which the eastern and western
nations judge the beauties of language.
The eloquence of Mahomet, almost as
successful as his sword, was able to bring
proselytes to a false religion, and persuade
them that it was true.
Moses was a celebrated legislator, bred up
in a refined court, and was instructed in all
the wisdom of the Egyptians.
Solomon, drawing instruction from a higher
fountain than human authority, himself of
royal dignity, was esteemed capable of go
verning kingdoms more numerous, thair the
subjects contained in his own. His wisdom
has for many ages been the admiration of
Europe, as it had before been venerated by
the Asiatics.
The prophet Daniel, whose youth afforded
the promise of future greatness, was instructed
by the sages of a polished kingdom, and was
further end ded with hea verify wisdom ffom
the Holy Spirit. His illustrious qualifications
174.
raised him from captivity, to become chief of
the Chaldean sages, and to excel in rank the
princes of Media.
That these celebrated writers, whom the
eastern nations held in such high admiration,
should not be esteemed by many of our
Latinists, must be attributed to a diversity of
opinions on the subject of eloquence.
Cicero himself, found many censurers
among Europeans ; and a book has been
written to prove, that Tully was not eloquent.
If a material difference of opinion, therefore
exist among Europeans, as to the merits of a
Roman author, is it not reasonable to suppose,
that the Grecian and Roman style, should
be as little agreeable to the taste of eastern
writers, as their style is to ourselves? and
consequently in those parts of Scripture,
where the excellence of the composition is
not obvious to our criticism, may not an
eastern species of eloquence, be mistaken
for the absence of all eloquence ?
We may possibly be confirmed in this
opinion, if we consider that the earliest prose
writers now extant among us, were scarcely
contemporaneous with the latest writers of
the Old Testament : and that language, the
dress of our thoughts, like our outward
clothing, is affected materially in its fashion
175
and style by distance, as well as time; and
that distant regions differ from each 'other
in both respects, as much as distant ages.
And that in language as in attire, it happens
in many instances, that what was lately fashion
able, is now ridiculous, and what now makes
a man pass for a courtier, may within fifty
years give him the appearance of a buffoon.
Fashion may be said in a certain measure
to possess a creative power, that its fiat calls
elegance into life, and its frown converts it
into deformity ; that relenting, she sometimes
capriciously restores her discarded favourites.
I can bring forward no less illustrious a
witness than Seneca, to testify that fashion
assumes a similar power in dictating what
shall be admired in composition. He treats
of this subject in several passages of his
writings, but in his hundred and fourteenth
epistle, he adduces abundant proofs to support
it, and represents that in some ages the faulty
modes of expression, adopted by the wits of
the time, have passed for eloquence. These
observations may be applied to the style of
the Scriptures, which even if it now possessed
no claim to eloquence, might have possessed
many perfections in the judgment of those
times, in which its several books were res
pectively composed; and might have been
176
accurately suited to the taste of the people
it was primarily designed to influence.
If I might presume to suggest a new
doctrine, in an art in which my pretensions
to skill are very limited, I would thus describe
it in few words : rhetoric is an organic, or
instrumental art, the chief object of which is
persuasion or delight : its rules ought to be
esteemed, in the ratio of their tendency to
accomplish that object. A skilful writer will
therefore consider himself bound by the rules
of rhetoric, so far only as they are calculated
to please or to persuade.
When this can be better accomplished
by declining the rules of rhetoric, than by
practising them, he should not hesitate to
prefer the end to the means : the scope of
the artist, to what the schools are pleased to
call, the scope of the art ; and to render his
discourse efficacious, may judge it expedient
to depart from all formality and order. Thus
his anxiety not to lose his game, will often
induce the hunter to deviate from the moat
frequented paths. .. .
It is to take a very limited view of the
diversified beauties of composition, to judge
of the language of all ages, and of all nations,
by the rules which Cicero's admirers impose
on ourselves; and to consider their systems
177
of precepts synonymous with the whole art
of rhetoric, as if they were equivalent of of
the same extent.
Cicero, I admit, was deservedly celebrated
for his eloquence, and addressed himself suc
cessfully to the circumstances of his hearers :
with so great an example before them, many
orators, from a despair of excelling it, or
from a modest estimation of their own powers,
were withheld from aspiring to any thing
more than imitation ; and with this view,
observing the peculiar contrivances which
Tully adopted, and the particular figures of
speech which he preferred, reduced their
observations, combined with his own, into
rules and precepts. A system thus originated,
met with the applause of their successors, and
with some additions drawn from the practice
of a few other orators, assumed the con
sistency of a formal art. This, or something
similar to this, might have been the original
process, which gave rise to the art of rhetoric.
This I deny not to be a considerable aid in
the imitation of Tully and Demosthenes, Or of
others from the structure of whose orations
such institutions have been drawn: but I shall
no more receive it as a complete system of rhe
toric, than I would consider the instructions
deducible from the journals of Solomon's
178
Tarsish fleets, or remarks taken from the logs
of the Grecian and Roman sea voyages, as a
true and complete system of navigation.
If through the force of natural genius, or of a
cultivated understanding, other and more suc
cessful methods of moving the passions, more
powerful means of persuasion, or a more point
ed tone of expression, should be discovered,
there would be as little reason to confine
the enterprising composer to prescriptions
previously acquiesced in, and scrupulously
followed, as there would have been to lay an
injunction on Columbus, to follow the practice
and the tracks of ancient navigators : had his
soaring genius been imprisoned within the
confines of their methods and voyages ; had
he not boldly dared to differ from and to excel
them, how vast and rich a portion of the earth
had remained undiscovered !
On the present occasion, Theophilus, I can
not resist the disposition I have to introduce
an argument, which I am persuaded you will
think neither to be despised, nor to be censured
as impertinent. The people of China are
esteemed the most numerous, the most flourish
ing, and with few exceptions, the most civilized
nation in the world. In this nation, possessing
in their own language the whole circle of liberal
arts and sciences, advancement and honors are
179
confined lo literary merit. Of the elegance of
their literature I can form no opinion, being
unacquainted with the Chinese language. I
find however by a late traveller in China, who
wrote the history of that empire in the Italian
language, and by other authors who treat of
the state of learning among them; that this
ingenious and flourishing nation, who beyond
others encourage and recompense learned
men, has not admitted rhetoric into the
number of their arts and sciences.
It may be fairly presumed that they have
rejected the art of oratory, under the im
pression that it would be an incumbrance
to the strong, rather than an aid to the weak:
that it would in fewer instances enable those
to express themselves eloquently whom nature
has indisposed to do so, than embarrass others
in their expression, who were skilful enough
to take advantage of their full liberty.
Yet to assert that our strict Ciceronian rules
are crutches to a lame and slow apprehension,
but fetters and chains to a sound and active
imagination, would be to assert too much :
this however I must remark, that they find
few advocates among writers in general,
whose works would be obvious to their
scrutiny : and that the wise men of the west,
as well as those of the east, are not willing
180
to abandon brilliant thoughts and good
expressions, because they are not reducible
to rules of art ; and this is the more worthy
of notice, because the blind servility of too
many has led them to an indiscreet and
unreserved imitation of the faults, as well as
the beauties of applauded authors ; to create
the errors of such artists, rules of art, to
make the particular fancies and failings of
one writer, binding as a law on others, and
thus to convey them to their successors, who
afterwards confidently pronounce all want of
compliance with their heedless injunctions,
presumption.
Seneca speaks of imperfections of style,
which are first introduced by some person,
who at the time is the arbiter of eloquence;
others he remarks imitate them and deliver
them to their successors. When Sallust
flourished, he further alleges, the peculiarities
of his style recommended abrupt and dis
located sentences, and a singular position of
words, and made an obscure brevity to be
esteemed ornamental.* And indeed it is not
concealed from the notice of any one, that
the very weeds of extolled writers, are often
extolled for the flowers of rhetoric.
* Usee v itia unus aliquis inducit, sub quo tunc eloqucntia est : carter! imi tan tur,
et alter alteii tiadunt. Sic Sallustio vigente, amputate sentential, et verba ante
expeclatum cadeulia, et obscifta brevitas, fuere pro cultu—Seneca Ejiist. 111.
181
Having deviated perhaps too far from the
path I had traced out, I shall conclude this
digression by asserting, that as I am contending
for the Holy Scriptures, I shall persist in my
design, unbiassed by the cautious appre
hensions of the cardinal, or the aspersions
of those who disparage the sacred style by
unfair comparisons.
Tully's compositions may accurately ex
emplify the rules of eloquence ; but I must
impress it once more on your remembrance,
that the exact conformity observable in
Cicero's writings to the laws of art, is the
less astonishing from this circumstance, that
those laws of art are framed from his own
writings.
But I am apprehensive, Theophilus, that
I have detained you too long by a digression,
which indeed the occasion led me to: it is
not however so indispensable to my present
argument, but that I should freely acquit
you of contumacy, should you not attach to
the paradox it contains^ the superlative
degree of importance. .....,,.,
Proceeding to the fourth answer which I
proposed, I directly contradict the assertion,
that the Scriptures are destitute pf ornamented
language : on the contrary, there are few if
any writings, which in proportion to their
182
bulk, abound more, in figurative expression.
The surprise this assertion might create,
may be removed, by adducing hundreds of
instances in confirmation of it, as there are
few tropes or figures in rhetoric, of which
numerous examples are not to be collected
out of the expressions of Scripture. I am
the more confident of this, because a bare
catalogue of the rhetorical passages which
I could enumerate, would too much extend
the limits of an essay : and I have been
informed, that task has already been success
fully undertaken by abler pens. At present,
I shall only remark, that the eloquence of the
sacred writers has been highly celebrated by
no small number of persons, themselves highly
celebrated for eloquence; and that many who
thought themselves adequate judges of good
writing, at least equally so with those who
censure the Scriptures, have considered that
all their critical talent could not do justice
to the language of the prophet Isaiah.
The excellent prince of Mirandula, who is
denominated by the greatest Rabbi at present
flourishing, the phenix of his age, having car
ried his researches through all the volumes of
human learning, found rest and satisfaction
only in the volume of Divine Wisdom. This
I esteem no trivial recommendation of the
183
Scriptures. What an excellent poet asserts
respecting objects of affection, may with some
propriety be applied to books :
'Tis not that which first we love,
But what dying we approve.
WALLER.
The last results of mature judgment conveys
the strongest testimony.
The most skilful rhetoricians have divided
their art into two parts, ornament and congruity
; the accommodation of the style, to
the circumstances of the speaker and the
hearers. The latter is peculiarly and inimitably
practised in the Sacred Writings.
The former is not only of less importance,
but is changeable and liable to be contested :
as I have lately endeavoured to demonstrate.
It is, however, resorted to by the inspired
penmen, as far as it is suitable to their purpose,
or is requisite to evince, that smoothness and
propriety of style is observed, wherever it
does not interfere with their design : and
where these verbal ornaments are omitted,
they are not required.
. Some persons are possessed of that sym
metry of form, which renders the plainest dress
becoming to them ; when the greatest efforts
and the most elegant vestments will never
impart gracefulness, to one whose person is
184
ordinary or defective. In writings also, the
subject and the structure may be such, that
the plainest language cannot affect their sub
limity, so as to prevent them from rising
far superior to a trivial subject, unequally
combined with all the graces of rhetoric.
But in regard to Scripture language, it is
often highly ornamented, when the beauty
of the style being overwhelmed by the
magnificence of the subject, it may not
conspicuously appear. In roses of diamonds,
the brilliance of the gem frequently draws
the attention from the figure and the enamel.
Thus the language may not appear great,
because it is eclipsed by that which is greater
than itself.
Some famous writers have challenged
Demosthenes and Cicero to a comparison
with the prophet Isaiah, in whom they have
not only admired that lofty strain, which the
rhetorician denominates the sublime, but that
harmonious disposition and sound of words,
pleasingly called by the French, La cadence
des periods.
I have formerly acknowledged to you,
Theophilus, that there are some men distin
guished for wit and imagination, who speak
disrespectfully of the Scriptures : if any such
characters should fall under your notice, Jet
185
me suggest to you to call to remembrance, that
among the wits of the day, there are those who
celebrate and admire the Sacred Writings, as
well as some who treat them lightly. And to
strengthen this suggestion you might take into
your consideration, that there are many things
that ought to lower your opinion of those who
disparage the Scriptures, in the cas,e now con
templated. How few of them are there, who,
read the Bible in the original ! And how much
less numerous are those who consider, or even
know all the particulars which I have already
represented respecting the style of the Scrip
tures ! So that a man of understanding will
often undervalue the Scriptures, not from
the superiority of his genius, but from not
possessing competent information, as to what
may be adduced to do them justice.
Should we suppose the persons we speak
of to be in no want of information, yet even
a well-informed person may be under the
influence of vanity, or envy.. There is no
fault perhaps more incident to men of genius
than literary ambition : they are too pfteri
under painful impressions, on contemplating
the celebrity of compositions they cannot call
their own ; and seem to feel, that all praises
rendered to the merit of others, is a disparage
ment of themselves.
N
186
It should not occasion our surprise therefore,
that a book possessing so many perfections
as the Scriptures, should as well excite envy
as admiration. From this feeling in the hu
man character, it might also be expected, that
many should raise cavils at the Scriptures and
affect to disregard them, from a culpable
attachment to the title of a wit, which they
hope to acquire by avoiding the frequented
path, and should endeavour to prove a supe
riority over others, by affecting to despise,
and by casting indignities on that, which they
treat with reverence and veneration.
But it is too well known, that of the enemies
of Scripture there is a large proportion, whose
envy and vanity, though no trivial errors, are
not their greatest faults. Their profligate and
disgraceful lives render the suspicion tenable,
that they raise a clamour against the Scriptures
with the view of excusing themselves from liv
ing in conformity with their precepts. Hence
it is no scandal to affirm it to be their inclina
tion, and not their reason, that induces them
to criminate the Sacred Volume, in whose
pages they are themselves condemned.
"Whoever is sensible of the apposite truth of
our Lord's assertion, that many love darkness
rather than light, because their deeds are evil;
and that he that doeth evil, hateth the light,
187
neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved,—will not be surprised,
on marking the application of this passage to
the impugners of the Scriptures, to find that
conscious malefactors are dissatisfied with the
statute book ; but will regard the censures of
these sinners as apologies to palliate their
wickedness, or as acts of revenge for being ex
posed in the Sacred Page in all their deformity
to the eyes of the world, and to the scrutiny
of their own consciences ; and will be con
vinced, that their irreligious expressions
indicate rather what they would wish men to
believe of them, than what they think of the
Scriptures. For, by gaining the credit of
despising them, they hope to secure this
advantage : that their vices may be imputed
to a superiority of their reason over that of
others, rather than the subservience of reason
to their passions.
I now proceed to the last reply to the last
objection, which I proposed to answer; and
in these concluding considerations I propose
to maintain, that it is very far from being
agreeable to experience, that the style of the
Scriptures deprives them of their influence
over the generality of readers, unless they are
culpably indisposed to receive impressions
from them.
188
That intelligent readers are not accustomed
to be influenced by the Scriptures, has already
been in a great measure incidentally replied
to. I have already observed to you, that as
on the one hand it may be granted, that in
some men of lively imagination, the perusal
of the Scriptures has excited petulance, rather
than admiration ; so it cannot be denied, that
many persons as eminent for wit as themselves,
have read them with veneration and esteem.
And the evidence of the one party, who
argue in celebrating their praises, may be
received at lesjst as countervailing testimony,
when contrasted with the unbecoming disres
pect of those who raise against them captious
and frivolous objections; particularly when
it is considered, that those impugners who are
received as men of wit or talent, often ground
their false claim to that distinction, on the
vain and arrogant profession, that they lightly
esteem them.
The greater number of readers who may be
denominated intelligent, for it is with them
that we are at present concerned, are not in
possession of that quick sagacity that ordina
rily supplies a man's title to the appellation
of a wit ; although they may be distinguished
by other qualities, more solid and more
valuable.
189
The ascendency the Scriptures have over
that class of intelligent readers, who possess
the sounder judgment, is abundantly evinced
in the instance of the numerous scholars, as
well laymen as divines, who have illustrated Or
recommended the Scriptures, in their learned
commentaries and other writings. And how
great is the number of men of understanding
and sound sense, who by their sermons and
other discourses, as well as by the conformity
of their lives to its doctrines, have proved them
selves to be under the influence of Scripture J
The most unequivocal testimony is borne to
the power any principle has over the minds of
men, by the sacrifices they are induced to
make in support of that principle. Without
quitting my present argument, therefore, we
may consider how many men of good under
standing almost every age has produced,
without excepting our own degenerate times,
who have been taught by the Scriptures, and
prevailed upon by them to renounce the high
est gratifications and pleasures, and embrace
a course of life, that has often exposed them
to dangers, and not unfrequently to perplexing
difficulties and severe mortifications.
Every description of persons bear their tes
timony to the efficacy of the Sacred Writings,
in the improvement and reformation which
190
generally speaking, they have induced among
them, as well as in the affectionate veneration
they have entertained for the Book, to which
they have acknowledged themselves indebted
for these advantages.
The accounts conveyed to us by ecclesias
tical history, of the large sums of money given
by many for copies of the Sacred Volume,
when the possession of it rendered them liable
to danger if not to capital punishment, strongly
confirms my argument ;* and the testimony
which many devout persons have thus borne
to their veneration of the Bible, would justly
excite our admiration, and suggest a mortify
ing contrast to the apathy which too often
permits that treasure of sacred learning to lie
neglected on our shelves.
There are two classes of professed Christians
who are the most likely to be assailed by
temptations to neglect or to disparage the
Bible : and those are, persons who are received
as men of wit and learning, or who have the
• The unwearied pains which learned men have taken, to bring the Holy
Scriptures to the state of purity, in which our translation presents them, if
generally known, would bear useful testimony to the immense estimation in
which they held them. Their perseverance in collecting and collating ancient
manuscripts, and in acquiring the languages in which they were written, in
tracing the different branches of the first churches, and in studying the varieties
of dialect the Scriptures were written in which they received, corresponds if
possible with the importance of the truths contained in them ; which were duly
estimated by a pious monarch of France, who in the ninth century, caused a
manuscript of the whole Volume to be written in letters of gold Editor.
191
ambition to be esteemed so; and those who
are conversant with fashionable life, and live
in courts. The former think themselves too
wise to be taught, particularly by a book they
think not well written : among the latter there
are too many whose pleasures are so captiva
ting, or so dear to them, that they give no
countenance to that which would divert, much
less to that which would divorce them from
their pursuits; or their occupations are so
diversified, and perhaps so important, that
they have not enough leisure to learn, and too
much pride to think they need it. Yet under
these discouraging circumstances, the Bible
has had votaries among those who have worn
crowns, not only of gold, but of bays, and
even of myrtle. — Kings, conquerors, and
poets, have been among its admirers.
To pass over the names of those I have
before instanced as being lovers of the Sacred
Writings, as well, as favourites of the Muses,
I would now remark, that in that class, to
use our Saviour's words, who are gorgeously
apparalled, live delicately, and are in king's
courts, there are many persons, upon whom
the power of the Scriptures has been almost
as conspicuous, as their stations among men.
It is not to my present purpose to instance
the devout treasurer of the Ethiopian queen,
192
whose devotion, unwearied by the length bT
his journey, led him to peruse the writings of
Isaiah even on the public road, who inquired
of a stranger who passed unattended and on
foot, the meaning of a passage he understood
not : hor do I purpose at present to urge any
other instance from Sacred History in support
of my present argument: and therefore shall
not particularly press the example of the
great and wise Daniel, whose superior ability
raised him to the highest employment in the
great eastern empire, preserved him from
falling with its ruins, and accomplished that
which has scarcely a precedent among the
wisest statesmen, in securing for him the same
high rank and favour under the successor,
which he had enjoyed under his predecessor;
who it may be remarked, had made his pre
decessor's death his avenue to the throne.
I shall adduce ho further instance from the
Sacred Records, of the respect rendered them
by the great, because secular histories Of a
later date inform us, that the glittering vanities
that abound in courts, have not so far dazzled
the eyes of those who frequent them, but that
some have discerned and practically acknow
ledged the paramount claims of Scripture.
It cannot indeed be affirmed that many
kings have been of this number, because
persons ttf royal dignity are very few in
number. But even among these and in
degenerate ages, some have been conspicuous
for their studious observance of the Sacred
Writings. I must here name the good king
Edward the sixth, who imitated the early
piety df Joash, without imitating his sub
sequent defection from it : and whose short
and heavenly life is an evidence how soon,
even among the temptations of courts, it is
possible to be matured through the grace
of God, for immortal glory. The learned
king James is another instance, whose able
defence of many of the sacred truths of
Scripture against those who perverted them,
has sufficiently proclaimed to the world, that
his knowledge of the Scriptures was not
superficial.
Even in the darker times that preceded
the reformation, the excellent Arragonian
king Alphonsus, the honour both of his title
and of his times, though occupied with
various studies, and involved in numerous
wars, made it his boast, that notwithstanding
the multiplicity of his pursuits, he found time
to read the Bible through forty times, with
its glosses and commentaries : deeply read
in astronomy, he was not so absorbed in the
contemplatidn of heaven, as to deny himself
194
leisure to trace, in the Book of its Maker,
the path which leads there.
I shall not here forbear to mention the last
pope, Urban the eighth. When a cardinal,
and his ambition animated with the wellgrounded
expectation of becoming both
temporal and ecclesiastical lord of that
proud city, which makes religion and arms
indifferently the instrument of her extended
domination, in the midst of engagements,
perhaps more distracting than most potentates
are harassed with: his head crowded with
affairs enough to have distressed Macchiavel,
found room in it for reflections on the Scrip
tures, some portions of which, adorned by
the effusions of his pious muse, have afforded
me much delight and satisfaction : and this
I scruple not to acknowledge : for even if I
thought it my duty to consider every one
who dissents from the church, as an enemy,
which I do not, I should yet be inclined to
believe that they could scarcely love virtue
enough, who loved it not in their enemies.
To Hannibal, statues were erected in Rome
itself. And although I had so little charity
and experience as to refuse all claim to any
good quality, to the man who is unfortunate
enough to be in error, yet influenced by
an impression in harmony with that, which
195
prompted David's anger against the person
who was supposed to have taken away the
poor man's single lamb, the fewer the good
qualities I should observe in any adversary,
the more reluctant I should feel, to rob him
of any one of them.
Nor has that sex whose employment is
too often dissipation, failed to supply the
Scriptures with titled and royal votaries: not
to mention the Grecian princess, whose pro
selyted muse made Homer turn evangelist, I
am constrained to bring to your remembrance
an illustrious mother, and as excellent a
daughter, Paula and Eustochium : how well
versed they were in sacred learning is un
known to no one who is not a stranger
to the writings of St. Jerom : for some of
whose learned comments on the Scriptures,
we are indebted to their importunity. Arid
even in our times that so much degenerate
from the primitive ages, we may instance
that glory of princesses, and the envy of the
princes of her time, queen Elizabeth: how
eminent a student, and how great a proficient
she was in the study of the Bible, both her
life and her reign sufficiently declare. Her
sister's predecessor, the illustrious lady Jane,
had every quality the best patriots could
desire in a queen, but an unquestionable
196
title. In her sad fate, not only her sex
and all its attractive graces, but philosophy,
virtue, religion, her country, all sustained
a loss. This lamented princess was a con
spicuous admirer of the Sacred Volume, in
which her successful assiduity gave her an
understanding much beyond her age and sex,
although more than equalled by her virtue.
Eudocia is another eminent instance of
sacred learning attained by illustrious females;
and very many other persons of the highest
quality might be named of the same sex, and
some on whom nature and fortune, or rather
beauty and providence had conferred a
sovereignty ; whom neither the splendor, the
pleasures, nor the avocations of courts could
withhold, from searching in God's Word for
preservatives against the contagion, which
their condition exposed them to. Sometimes
the pages of history, sometimes conversation
has afforded me most welcome opportunities
of observing those celebrated beauties, whose
fatally pleasing influence has converted so
many to idolatry, who disregarding the apostacy
they have occasioned, have devoutly
turned those fair eyes to the Scriptures
intently perusing those severe writings, that
depreciate all beauty, but that of the soul :
and for this they have firmly averted their
197
attention from those flattering ascriptions,
that deified that of the body.
In any instance it cannot occasion surprise,
that a perusal of the Sacred Volufne should
incite one who is not an unbeliever, to a
more particular study of it : not only from its
power to interest the feelings, but its Divine
Author so earnestly enjoins the study of it,
that no one can be supposed to esteem neglect
in this respect, otherwise than culpable, with
the exception of those, who themselves are
guilty of it.
Nor is the diligent perusal of the Scriptures
so much to be surprised at as commended in
the softer sex, who perhaps more generally
than ours are susceptible of strong impressions
of devotion.
If we loved God, I do not say as we ought,
but as we can love Him, and as we do love
terrestrial objects, it would greatly endear
the Scriptures to us, that the object of our
devotion is their Author. When true aflection
prevails, although the lover-s soul is fixed on
a fading object, what lively fondness does his
love excite for all things, which relate to his
passion's idol !—-her residences, her walks,
her mantle's colour, things the most trivial,
that once were in her possession, exact a
kindness that trifles do not claim : grateful
198
to them for brightening to his fancy the only
image which it retains, he dwells on an ideal
presence, when distant from the fair reality.
Or favoured with a kind epistle, with greedy
eyes he devours the envied page, and derives
new transport from each expression: repeated
perusals administer new delight, and every
line contains some hidden excellence: the
writing becomes obliterated before it ceases to
excite new feelings of pleasure, and it is then
preserved with almost religious veneration.
With such insatiate avidities does a lover prize
a writing, too often deluding or insignificant:
esteeming it above the noblest raptures of
poets, or the most gracious letters of princes.
The superstitious devotion evinced in the
adoration of relicks is too nearly allied to
this amorous idolatry. But if God who
possesses all those qualities in absolute per
fection, the resemblance of which excites the
transports of real love: if He were duly
adored, with how much constancy and
delight should we contemplate the sacred
page, which like the bright resemblance of
the sun, in the phenomenon of the parhelion,
reflects his lustre, and exhibits his portraiture:
a gracious epistle, expressive of His vast and
unmerited love to us, and exhibiting the
nearest resemblance of the beloved source of
199
all our bliss, which God hath framed for
mortals to contemplate.
It was a pious objection of a devout father
to some of the most select compositions of
antiquity, that Christ was not named in them.
And if the pious and illustrious females, I
have lately announced were of his opinion,
our necessary inference must be, that they
bestowed on the Scriptures no ordinary proofs
of their favour : where the prophets and apostles
in their more obscure, or more open enun
ciations, with one consent, and with equal
assiduity so highly celebrate the Messiah,
that on reading and comparing them, my
imagination often presents to me the scene of
his triumphant entrance into Jerusalem, where
those who went before, and those who followed
after him, sang Hosannah to the Son of
David.— Matt. 21, 9.
'Men of genius, great princes, and females
celebrated for their rank and personal
attractions, amidst all the temptations that
surrounded them, have been devoted to the
Scriptures. Hence it may be inferred, that
under more favourable circumstances, some
pious persons in most ages, who are unre
corded, have been able to address themselves
to their Maker in the words of Jeremiah,
"Thy words were found and I did eat them ;
200
and thy word was tp me the joy and rejoicing
of my heart."—(Jer. 15, 16.) If such instances
have been rare, it is a proof according to my
apprehension, that wise and good men have
not abounded : in regard to persons of other
ranks, ecclesiastical histories furnish abun
dant instances of the attachment of God's
children to HisWord : they might be produced
thence almost in throngs, if we could not
suggest nobler inducements to the study of
the inspired Volume, than example. That
so many saints have studied, it, is a less
recommendation, to our respect, than that
the study of it made them saints, nor was it
in name only that many of them became
saints by that exercise: a circumstance indeed
which the assertion of the great and holy
Saint Paul might lead us to expect, when he
assures us, that all of it is " divinely inspired,"
and improveable to all the uses, requisite to the
perfect accomplishment of God's servant^.—
2 Tim. 3, 16.
But to turn your attention, Theophjlus,
once more to the renovating power of the
Sacred Volume, upon many of its readers, I
must add, that though through the blessing of
God, their number is far greater than that of
the professed adversaries of the Scriptures ;
yet those who are materially influenced by its
201
perusal, are not so numerous as we might
desire: for our Saviour's parable, justified by
our own observation, has sufficiently taught
us, that good seed does not always fall into
good ground, and that many intervening
accidents may, after it has been sown, make
it fail, or prove fruitless.
But the Scriptures, I fear it may be alleged
with too much truth, have not upon the reader
frequently that power, which they might be
expected to have : and this particularly in
reference to the profane. I must, however,
as to this point call to your remembrance,
that I do not maintain that the Scriptures are
influential on those who are culpably indis
posed to receive impressions from them; and
that profane persons are so, I presume will be
granted; for when our Lord said that "if any
man will do the will of Him that sent him, he
shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
God," (John, 7- 17) he clearly intimates, that
there is required a certain disposition in
the eye of the soul, as well as in the object
proposed, to enable any person to discern
the excellence and the origination of what is
taught, however valuable it might be.
Saint Paul says, respecting himself and
other teachers of the Gospel, " We speak
wisdom among them that are perfect," and
although not the wisdom of this world, yet
o
202
" the wisdom of God in a mystery ; even that
hidden one, which was ordained of God before
the world, to our glory."—1 Cor. 2. 7. But that
scorners should read the Scriptures without
profit, without discerning any of the myste
rious wisdom, we are led to anticipate from
Scripture itself. " A scorner seeketh wisdom,
and findeth it not."—Prov. 14. 6. The Sodo
mites could not find the angels, when they
sought them for their atrocious purposes.—
Gen. 19. 5, 11.
It is not those moreover, who employ their
wit and imagination to the purposes of profaneness,
but there are too many readers of a
different class, who are in a greater or a less
degree guilty of opposing within themselves,
the reforming and improving influence of the
Scriptures, arising either from not sufficiently
believing, or not sufficiently pondering, the
truths contained in them.
That unbelief is productive of more sins
than we are accustomed to impute to it : and
that many persons who are baptized into the
Christian faith are not exempt from greater *
measures of infidelity than others, or even
themselves have any suspicion of, I might here
prpve satisfactorily, had I not professedly
treated on that subject, in another place. . .
It requires no more than to observe, how
far the lives of most men are influenced by
203
the promises and threats held forth in the
Sacred Volume, which extend to nothing less.
than everlasting joys and endless torments; to
convince any one, that there are multitudes
of Christians, at least of those who are avow
edly Christians, to whom may be applied the
assertion of Saint Paul respecting the perverse
Jews, "That what they heard *lid not profit
them, not being mixed with faith in them
that heard it;" (Heb. 4. 2) or according to
the sense which the Greek will admit, because
they were not united by faith, to the things
they heard.
But this is not all, for the doctrines of Scrip
ture often lose much of their efficacy, even
where they are cordially believed, from not
being sufficiently weighed and considered.
The disparity existing between the influence
of a bare belief, and the due consideration of
truth, is I think sufficiently conspicuous in the
thoughts men are accustomed to entertain of
death: for though that event itself is so truly
believed, that it cannot seriously be doubted,
yet how clearly may the want of considera
tion be traced, in passing life as if it were
never to terminate ! But when the grace of
God, or sickness, the sight of a dying friend,
or some other alarming scene, has brought to
their contemplation the thought of death, the
change produced in their lives by the active
204
operation, and the permanent impression of
that one obvious and unquestionable truth,
cannot fail to strike our observation. It is
equally surprising to observe, in how great a
measure the sober thought of death contributes
to prepare men for that great change ; for no
inducement can be more imperious, in im
pelling men " to deny ungodly and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and
Godly, in this present world,"* than the
thought, that they must one day leave it.—
Hence, I am not surprised at the celebrated
austerity of a certain father, who tells us that
he never ceased to imagine, sounding in his
inward ears, the dreadful alarm of " Arise !
ye dead, and come to judgment !"t
That many readers from a culpable aversion
to the Scriptures, refuse to reverence and obey
them, must be allowed. It must be allowed
also, though not without adequate cause, which
I have explained, that in many passages of
the Sacred Volume the ornaments of language
have been purposely declined : yet, amidst
these disadvantages, we find that no other
book of ethics or devotion bears any compa
rison with the Sacred Volume, either with
reference to the esteem with which it is
regarded, or to the obedience with which it
t Surgite mortui ct venite ad judicium.
205
is received by the generality of its readers ;
and multitudes, even of those who by their pas
sions or by their interests are prevented from
receiving it as their guide, yet so far acknow
ledge its sway, as to be influenced to exertion
or forbearance in many cases, wherein other
books would not prevail with them.
Although Saint John could not persuade
Herod to repudiate Herodias, he was yet pre
vailed upon in other instances, by the Baptist's
preaching, and heard him gladly. Mark 12.37.
Permit me now, Theophilus, to offer you
a general remark : what divines have observed
of God the Word, may not unaptly be applied
to the Word of God : for as those events
which proclaimed most loudly our Lord's
assumption of human nature and infirmities,
were attended with some circumstances that
conspicuously attested his divinity, so in those
passages of Scripture in which the majesty of
the Author's style is most veiled and disguised,
there is yet some peculiarity which discloses it.
But this is a remark, that I can make to
you with greater confidence : that in a variety
of those passages in which the Holy Spirit,
according to the Greek father's accustomed
expression, " stoops to our capacities," and
as it were sinks himself down to our level, and
seems to have vouchsafed a condescension to
the style of men, and to have commanded his
206
penmen, as he once did the prophet Isaiah,
to write with a man's pen ;* in many of those
passages in which the Divine Author thus
bends to our infirmities, there is something
so awful and so peculiarly his own, that the
prerogative which raises them above human
compositions, is manifestly. apparent. Thus,
when the sun descends into the west, he still
continues far more brilliant than the other
luminaries of the hemisphere.
** Known unto God are all his Avorks from
the beginning of the world/'—Acts, 15. 18.
And God, whose attribute it is to know the
secrets of the heart,t and whose power formed
the spirit of man, understands our thoughts
afar off.—Psalm 13. 2.
If then we consider God as the Creator of
our souls, and therefore best acquainted with
the frame, the springs and the nature of his
own workmanship, we shall find little difficulty
in believing, that in the book written for the
use of men, and verbally addressed to them,
He has employed that language, and adopted
those arguments which are best calculated to
influence them : and the reality corresponds
with the argument which might thus be drawn
a priori. There is a pathos, and if the epithet
is not too bold, a heavenly magic, the peculiar
and exclusive property of Scripture, and which
* W& JQ Tfia Be-chseret Enosh—Jsaiaft, 8. 1 . f xapSioynSfvr.—Acts, 1 . 24.
207
cannot be better described than in the words
of Scripture, " that the Word of God is quick
and powerful, and sharper than a two-edged
sword, piercing, even to the dividing asunder
of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart."—Heb. 4. 12.
History corroborates my argument : Junius
himself relates, that he was converted from a
condition, which nearly approached atheism,
to the true faith, by reading the first chapter
of Saint John ; a certain Rabbi acknow
ledges, that be was converted to Christianity
by reading the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah ;
Austin was changed from a profligate to a
saint, by the passage contained in the thir
teenth chapter of Saint Paul's epistle to the
Romans; another father, whom the fear of
death had prevailed upon to disclaim the
faith before a public assembly, burst into a
shower of tears on the occasional reading of
the sixteenth verse of the fiftieth psalm. I am
not so much surprised at these effects of the
Word of God, as lam, that such instances are
not of more frequent and familiar occurrence.
I can testify, however, to my own feelings,
that the reading of the Sacred Volume has
moved me more sensibly, and influenced me
more powerfully to all the sentiments it would
inspire, than compositions of the greatest wit
208
and genius extant in our own, and in some
other languages. So winning, indeed, is the
majesty of Scripture, that many who have
taken it up from curiosity, have found them
selves constrained to continue the exercise of
reading it from conscientious feelings: as ma
ny persons have formed a lasting attachment
to those ladies, whom they at first addressed,
from what the French term galanterie.
Others, who first read the New Testament
to learn some unknown language, hurried
beyond the end they designed, have met a
destiny nearly resembling that of Zaccheus,
who climbed up into a sycamore tree from
curiosity, to see the person whose fame had
filled the country ; but soon became the
proselyte and convert of his Saviour, and
entertained him joyfully, both in his house
and in his heart.—Luke, 19. 1 to 20.
The testimony of the church is usually our
first inducement to believe in the inspiration
of Scripture; but it is not always our chief
inducement. There are various degrees of
confidence : and where the authority of the
church may create a firm opinion, the unveiled
refulgence of the Sacred Page, may promote
undoubted faith. An appropriate observation
to this point, made by some of the ancients,
occurs to me, that the Samaritans who first
believed in Christ, on the woman's report,
209
when they were afterwards blessed with an
immediate conversation with our Lord, de
clared with exultation to the woman, " we
now believe, not because of thy saying, for
we have heard Him ourselves, and know
that he is indeed the Christ the Saviour of
the world."— John, 4. 39 to 42. Thus, many
who believe the Scriptures on the authority of
the church, are afterwards through a familiar
acquaintance with them, brought to believe
Scripture on its Own authority, which then
becomes the influential motive of faith ; and
this by the discovery of those intrinsic ex
cellencies and evidences, that manifest its
heavenly origination.
The Sacred Volume, where it does not
possess the embellishments of language, does
not require them ; being so far recommended
by its commanding and persuasive energy,
that the inutility of ornament is a higher
testimony in its favour, than could have been
supplied by its exuberance.
If, on the one hand, we may apply to some
of the passages of Scripture the assertion of
Saint Paul, which indeed he used to recom
mend his ministry to the Corinthians, " that
his speech and his preaching was not with the
enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the
demonstration of the spirit and of power ;"*
* E> iw.3i<'{u wnvpaifr 4, iu>mfitir—\ Corinthian; 2. 1 to 4.
210
We may also remark, that the apostle sub
joins as his reason for using this plain and
unadorned method of teaching his Corinthian
converts, " that their faith might not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God."
Verse 5.
When we consider the high ground on
which the Scriptures stand, as on the one
hand, their Divine Author sometimes conde
scends to draw us with the cords of a man,
passages wreathed with the flowers of rhetoric;
so on the other hand it is not inconsistent,
that He should employ expressions which
might manifest their derivation from Him,
who is not confined to such means as men
might think requisite, but is able to accom
plish His gracious designs not only without
ornamented language, but even without the
intervention of language; subduing us to
acquiescence, to reverence, or to obedience,
in spite of all opposition.
The instances experience affords us of the
efficacy of many texts, which some who pre
tend to criticism accuse of having none, are
not without a parallel in the book of nature :
where God has veiled in an obscure and
humble stone, a wonderful attraction not
vouchsafed to diamonds and rubies, which
the most unyielding of all metals obsequi»usly
acknowledges. And as the loadstone not only
~\
211
draws what the most brilliant jewels cannot
move, but draws more forcibly when armed
with iron, than when crowned with silver ;
so the Scriptures are not only more moving
than the most florid of human compositions,
but have frequently a more powerful influence
on the mind, in those passages which seem
quite destitute of ornament, than in those, in
which the flowers of rhetoric abound.
Leaving the subject of these considerations,
I should now, Theophilus, pass on to the
discussion of other topics relative to the
Scriptures, which I propose to make the '
subject of other treatises. But calling to
mind the critical notice you are accustomed
to bestow on my habits, and the inquiries you
frequently make as to my private opinions, I
imagine you alleging against what I have
here advanced, as to the high attributes
of the Scriptures in comparison with other
devotional compositions, that it is my own
custom to read, and much more frequently
to commend books of devotion.
I feel myself called upon therefore to reply
to this probable allegation against my con
sistency, that I regard the truths of Scripture
as so important and so valuable, that it
cannot but give pleasure to see them presentetl
to us in a variety of dresses, that
they may the more frequently become the
212
subject of our notice and attention : and,
although some pious compositions are written
with so little skill, that they are much better
calculated to express the devotion of the wri
ter, than to excite it in the reader; yet there
are others so well written and which support
so high a tone and expression of piety, that
a good man can scarcely read them without
becoming better, and a bad man must be
very depraved if he become not less so by
perusing them. Nor is it my intention to
disparage books of devotion, in expressing
my preference of the Scriptures to them. A
book may attain to a high degree of excel
lence although it may still be far inferior to
the Scriptures, on whose pre-eminent qualities
I have sufficiently enlarged : and shall on
the present occasion recommend to your
observation this one advantage only, which
they possess even in reference to those things,
which occur in books of devotion ; that if
" the words of the wise be like nails fastened
by the masters of assemblies," (Eccles. 12, 11)
according to Solomon's expression, the nail
will penetrate in proportion to the strength
of the hand that drives it : and it will not be
doubted, that any doctrine coming from God,
in the same terms in which it is delivered to
us, is the more likely to be received with
veneration and respect. Consistently with this
213
the apostle, in describing the reception the
Gospel met with from the Thessalonians, says
"that they received it not as the word of
man, but as it is in truth the Word of God,"
(1 Thess. 2, 13) after which he accordingly
subjoins, that it did also effectually work in
them that believed.
I am willing to admit, that the foreign
peculiarities and the obscurity of some texts,
in order to render them intelligible, and
to disengage their involved and compressed
meaning, require to be expressed by a cir
cumlocution : and the redundant richness of
others will also bear the same change. Yet
it is also true, that a mistake is often made
by those who attempt to deliver the con
ceptions of the Holy Spirit, in words more
apposite than His own.
The peculiar expressions of Scripture often
display a pathos and strength, to extend
which, might weaken their power. Peri
phrases, although well written, generally
speaking, lower the tone and energy of the
genuine text : as a mixture of silver, although
precious in itself, impoverishes an ingot of
gold. Some texts indeed are like pearls,
which lose their beauty when beaten into pow
der, and mixed with other ingredients : but
in that form they are exhibited, and operate
medicinally. Yet many sacred expressions
214
like diamonds, lose both their sparkling lustre
and their penetrating property, when ground
to dust: they suffer greater detriment in losing
their entireness and their form, than can be
recompensed by any addition. And speak
ing from my own experience, I can truly
aver, that no book of devotion affects me
with so strong and so powerful an influence,
as the Bible. My taste, I must confess, is
so easily offended by compositions, in which
the expression does not equal the dignity of
the subject, that devotional works in general
lose much in my estimation, on a second
reading. Towards the Sacred Volume on
the contrary, familiarity excites not contempt,
but reverence. The respect which familiar
acquaintance conciliates, is a high testimony,
both in regard to books and men.
When I first began to study the Scriptures,
it was my custom to mark in the margin the
passages that seemed to demand particular
notice. I accordingly marked, as occasion
presented, some few verses, perhaps, in a
chapter : but when, more familiar with the
idiom, the sense, • and the appropriation of
Scripture, I came to re-survey the field I had
traversed : I sometimes found myself con
strained to mark whole chapters, and in most
others left much fewer texts than before, un
furnished with some mark of reference. At
215
my entrance on this interesting study, I con
sidered even the choicest part of the Bible at
best to be compared to some Tndian province,
wherein though mines and gems might be
more abundant than in other countries, they
were yet but sparingly to be met with here and
there. After some perseverance however, en
suing perusals presented it to my imagination,
if not in all the lustre of a royal star, composed
of gold and precious stones, it yet occurred
to me under the more glorious though less
brilliant resemblance of Aaron's breast-plate;
a sacred treasure, framed by the direction of
God himself, glowing with gems set in myste
rious order, and rendered illustrious by the
Urim and Thummim wherein God vouchsafed
to reveal himself to mortals : and was so ar
tificially adorned with gold and blue, with,
purple, scarlet, and fine linen, that the con
trivance and workmanship lent a lustre to the
glimmering materials, without being obscured
by them. The experience I have derived from
this source, fully justifies in my opinion the
inspired poet's description of the good man
in saying, that his delight is in the Law of the
Lord, and that in his law he will exercise
himself day and night.* A study replenished
with so much delight to the pious and intelli-
* The word which other translations render voluntas and studium, our
translation renders delight. Indeed the Hebrew VSfl will bear both senses.
216
gent prosecutors of it, that like the hallelujahs
of the blessed, it is at once a duty and a
pleasure, an exercise and a recompense of
piety. If, according to the psalmist's prayer,
the pious Christian's study of that book should
open his eyes to behold the JTIN3SB hidden
wonders contained in it—he has reason to be
as fully satisfied as the navigator who discovers
an unknown country, and to rejoice as one
• that findeth great spoils.
And I must confess, that when with the
apostles in the Mount, I sometimes contem
plate Moses and Elias talking with Christ—I
mean the law and the prophets harmonizing
with the Gospel—I feel myself constrained by
a similar enthusiasm to exclaim with Saint
Peter, " it is good for me to be here," and
cease to think the royal prophet an hyperbolist
for comparing the transcendent sweetness of
God's word to the inferior sweetness of honey ;
which bears to it a striking similitude also in
this circumstance, that a much clearer and
more profitable idea of both their perfections
may be formed upon experience, than from
description.
FINIS.
Edwards & Savage, Printers, Cork.




lilim inn hiii mi. m.nimum n|| ? I
K

